EPIGRAM

We who erewhile were five booklets of Naso now 
are three ; the poet lias preferred to have his work 
thus rather than as before. Though even now you 
may take no joy of reading us, yet with two book-, 
taken away your pains will be lighter." 


I 

Arms, and the violent deeds of war, I was making 
ready to sound forth — in weighty numbers, with 
matter suited to the measure. The second verse 
was equal to the first— but Cupid, they say, with a 
laugh stole away one foot. 

5 "Who gave thee, cruel boy, this right over 
poesy? We bards belong to the Pierides ; we are no 
company of thine. What if Venus should seize away 
the arms of golden-haired Minerva, if golden-haired 
Minerva should fan into flame the kindled torch 
of love ? Who would approve of Ceres reigning on 
the woodland ridges, and of fields tilled under the 
law of the quiver-bearing Maid? Who would furnish 
forth Phoebus of the beautiful locks with sharp- 
pointed spear, and let Mars stir the Aonian Lyre ? 
Thou hast an empire of thine own — great, yea, all 
too potent ; why dos.t lay claim to new powers,
ambitious boy ? Or is everything, wheresoever, thine ? 
Thine are the vales of Helicon ? Is even the lyre 
of Phoebus scarce longer safely his own ? My new 
page of song rose well with first verse in lofty strain, 
when that next one — of thy making — changes to 
slightness the vigour of my work ; and yet I have 
no matter suited to lighter numbers — neither a bov, 
nor a maiden with long and well-kept locks." 

21 Such was my complaint — when forthwith he 
loosed his quiver, and chose from it shafts that were 
made for my undoing. Against his knee he stoutly 
bent moon-shape the sinuous bow, and " Singer,'' he 
said, " here, take that will be matter for thy song! " 

25 Ah, wretched me ! Sure were the arrows that 
yon boy had. I am on fire, and in my but now 
vacant heart Love sits his throne. 

27 In six numbers let my work rise, and sink again 
in five. Ye iron wars, with your measures, fare ye 
well ! Gird with the myrtle that loves the shore 
the golden locks on thy temples, O Muse to be sung 
to the lyre in elevens ! 


II 

What shall I say this means, that my couch seems 
so hard, and the coverlets will not stay in place, and 
I pass the long, long night untouched by sleep, and 
the weary bones of my tossing body are filled with 
ache ? — for I should know, I think, were I in any 
wise assailed by love. Or can it be that love is 
stolen into me, and cunningly works my harm with 
covered art ? Thus it must be ; the subtle darts are 
planted in my heart, and cruel Love torments the 
breast where he is lord, 

9 Shall I yield ? or by resisting kindle still more 
the inward-stealing flame that has me ? Let me 
yield ! light grows the burden that is well borne. 
I have seen flames wax when fanned by
movement of the torch, and I have seen them die down 
when no one waved it more. Oxen at the plough 
refusing the pressure of the first yoke endure more 
blows than those that pleasure in their toil. The 
mouth of the restive horse is bruised by the hard 
curb, and he feels the bridle less that yields himself 
to harness. More bitterly far and fiercely are the 
unwilling assailed by Love than those who own their 
servitude. 

19 Look, I confess ! I am new prey of thine, O 
Cupid ; I stretch forth my hands to be bound, 
submissive to thy laws. There is no need of war — 
pardon and peace is my prayer ; nor will it be 
praise for thine arms to vanquish me unarmed. 
Bind thy locks with the myrtle, yoke thy mother's 
doves; thy stepsire" himself shall give thee fitting 
car, and in the car he gives shaft thou stand, while 
the people cry thy triumph, and shalt guide with 
skill the yoked birds. In thy train shall be captive 
youths and captive maids ; such a pomp will be for 
thee a stately triumph. Myself, a recent spoil, shall 
be there with wound all freshly dealt, and bear my 
new bonds with unresisting heart. Conscience shall 
be led along, with hands tied fast behind her back, 
and Modesty, and all who are foes to the camp of 
Love. Before thee all shall tremble ; the crowd, 
stretching forth their hands to thee, shall chant with 
loud voice: "Ho Triumph!" Caresses shall he 
at thy side, and Error, and Madness — a rout that 
ever follows in thy train. With soldiers like these 
dost thou vanquish men and gods ; strip from thee 
aids like these, thou wilt be weaponless. 

39 All joyously as thou dost pass in triumph, thy 
mother shall applaud from Olympus' heights and 
scatter upon thy head the roses offered at her 
altars. With gems to deck thy wings, with gems 
to adorn thy hair, thyself golden, on golden wheels 
thou shalt ride along. Then, too, shalt thou touch 
with thy flame no few, if I know thee well ; then, 
too, as thou passest by. shalt thou deal full many 
a wound. Thine arrows could not cease, even 
shouldst thou so wish thyself; thy fervid flame 
brings dole with its heat as thou comest near. 
Such was Bacchus, the land of the Ganges overcome. 
Thou wilt be dread with thy span of birds ; with 
tigers dread was he. 

49 Since, then, I am thine to he part of thy sacred 
triumph, spare to waste upon me, O victor, thy 
power ! Look but on the fortunate arms of thy 
kinsman Caesar — the hand that has made him victor, 
he uses to shield the vanquished. 


III

Just is my prayer: let the maid who lias lately 
made me her prey either give me love, or give me 
reason for ever to love ! Ah, I have asked too 
much — let her but suffer herself to be loved ; may 
Cytherea hear my many prayers ! 

5 Take one who would be your slave through 
long years: take one who knows how to love with 
pure faith! If I have not ancient ancestry and great 
name to commend me, if the author of my line 
was but a knight, and my fields are not renewed 
with ploughshares numberless, if both my parents 
guard frugally their spending — yet Phoebus and his 
nine companions and the finder of the vine are on my 
side, and so is Love, who makes me his gift to you, 
and I have good faith that will yield to none, 
and ways without reproach, and unadorned 
simplicity, and blushing modesty. I am not smitten 
with a thousand — I am no Hit-about in love- : you, 
if there be any truth, shall be my everlasting care. 
With you may it be my lot to live the years which 
the Sisters' threads have spun for me, and to be 
sorrowed over by you when I die ! Give me yourself 
as happy matter for my songs — and my songs will 
come forth worthy of their cause. Through song 
came fame to Io frightened by her horns, and 
to her a lover beguiled in guise of the river-bird, 
and to her who was carried over the deep on the 
pretended bull while she grasped with virgin hand 
his bended horns." You and I, too, shall be sung 
in like manner through all the earth, and my name 
shall be ever joined with yours. 


IV

That husband of yours will attend the same 
banquet with us — may that dinner, I pray, be 
your husband's last! Must I then merely look upon 
the girl I love, be merely a fellow-guest ? Is the 
delight of feeling your touch to be another's, and 
must it be another's breast you warm, reclining close 
to him ? Shall he throw his arm about your neck 
whenever he wills? No longer marvel that when 
the wine had been set the fair daughter of Atrax 
drove to combat the men of ambiguous form!
My dwelling-place is not the forest, nor are my 
members partly man and partly horse — yet I seem 
scarce able to keep my hands from you ! 

11 Yet learn what your task must be, nor give my 
words to the East-wind to be borne away, nor to the 
tepid South ! Arrive before your husband — and yet I 
do not see what can be done if you do arrive before ; 
and vet, arrive before him. When he shall press the 
couch, you will come yourself with modest mien to 
recline beside him — in secret give my foot a touch ! 
Keep your eyes on me, to get my nods and the 
Language of my eyes; and catch my stealthy signs, 
and yourself return them. With my brows I shall 
say to you words that speak without sound ; you will 
read words from my fingers, you will read words
traced in wine. When you think of the wanton 
delights of our love, touch your rosy cheeks with 
tender finger. If you have in mind sonic silent
grievance against me, let your hand gently hold 
to the lowest part of your ear. When what I do 
or what I say shall please you, light of mine, keep 
turning your ring about your finger. Lav your hand 
upon the table as those who place their hands in 
prayer, when you wish your husband the many ills he 
deserves. 

29 The wine he mingles for you, be wise and bid 
him drink himself; quietly ask the slave for the kind 
you yourself desire. The cup that you give to him 
to fill, I will be first to take, and I'll drink from the 
part where you have drunk. If he chance to give 
you food that he has tasted first, refuse what his lips 
have touched. And don't allow him to place his 
arms about your neck, don't let your yielding head 
lie on his rigid breast ; and don't let your hidden 
charms submit to his touch ; and, more than all, don't 
let him kiss you — not once ! If you let him kiss you, 
I'll declare myself your lover before his eyes, and 
say, "Those kisses are mine!" and lay hand to my 
claim. 

41 Yet these offences I shall see, but those that 
the robe well hides will rouse in me blind fears. 
Bring not thigh near thigh, nor press with the limb, 
nor touch rough feet with tender ones. There are 
many things I wretchedly tear, because there are 
many I have wantonly wrought, and I am in torment, 
see ! from fear of my own example. Oft have my 
lady-love and I stolen in haste our sweet delights 
with her robe to cover us. This you will not do ; 
but lest you be thought to have done it. remove 
from your shoulders the conspiring mantle. Keep 
pressing your husband to drink — only add no kisses 
to your prayers! — and while he drinks, in secret it' 
you can, keep pouring him pure vine. If once we 
have him laid to rest in sleep and wine, our counsel 
we can take from place and circumstance. When 
you rise to go home, and all the rest of us rise, 
remember to lose yourself in the midst of the crowd. 
You will find me there in that crowd, or will be found 
by me. Wherever you can touch me there, lay 
hand on me. 

59 Miserable that I am, I have urged you to what 
will help for only a few scant hours ; I must be 
separated from my lady-love — night will command 
it. At night your husband will shut you in, and I 
all gloomy and pouring forth my tears, shall follow 
you — as far as I may — up to the cruel doors. Then 
he will take kisses from you, yes, then he will take 
not only kisses ; what you give me in secret, you 
will give him as a right, because you must. Hut 
give against your will — this much you can do — and 
like one made to yield ; let your favours be without 
word, and let him find Venus ill-disposed. If my 
vows have any weight, I pray she grant him no 
delight ; if not, may you at least have no delight from 
him. But whatsoever, none the less, shall be the 
fortune of the night, to-morrow with steadfast voice 
tell me you were not kind ! 


V

'Twas sultry, and the day had passed its mid 
hour ; I laid my members to rest them on the 
middle of my couch. One shutter of my window 
was open, the other shutter was closed ; the light 
was such as oft in a woodland, or as the faint ul<>\\ 
of the twilight when Phoebus just is taking Leave, 
or when night has gone and still the day is not 
sprung. It was such a light as shrinking maids 
should have whose timid modesty hopes to hide 
away — when lo ! Corinna comes, draped in tunic 
girded round, with divided hair falling over fair, 
white neck- — such as 'tis said was famed Semiramis 
when passing to her bridal chamber, and Lais loved 
of many men. 

13 I tore away the tunic — and yet 'twas fine, and 
scarcely marred her charms ; but still she struggled 
to have the tunic shelter her. Even while thus 
she struggled, as one who would not overcome, 
was she overcome — and 'twas not hard — by her own 
betrayal. As she stood before my eyes with drapery 
laid all aside, nowhere on all her body was sign of 
fault. What shoulders, what arms did I see — and 
touch ! How suited for caress the form of her 
breasts ! How smooth her body beneath the faultless
bosom ! What a long and beautiful side ! How 
youthfully fair the thigh ! 

23 Why recount each charm ? Naught did I see 
not worthy of praise, and I clasped her undraped 
form to mine. 

25 The rest, who does not know ? Outwearied, we 
both lay quiet in repose. 

May my lot bring many a midday like to this ! 


VI 

Janitor — unworthy fate ! — bound with the hard 
chain, move on its hinge the surly portal, and open 
it ! What I entreat is slight — see that the door 
stand but half ajar, enough to receive me sidewise 
through the small approach. Long loving has 
thinned my frame for practices like this, and has 
made my body apt thereto by wasting away my 
flesh. Love it is that teaches me how to walk softly 
past the watchful guard ; love is the guide that 
keeps my steps from stumbling. 

9 Yet once I was ever in fear of the night and its 
empty phantoms ; I marvelled at whosoever would 
venture abroad in darkness. Cupid laughed in my 
ear, with his tender mother, too, and lightly said : 
" You, too, shall become valiant ! " And without 
delay came love — no shades that flit by night, no 
arms raised up to deal my doom, do I fear now. 
You alone I fear, too unyielding to my wish ; on 
you alone I fawn ; it is you who hold the thunderbolt 
can ruin me. 

17 Look ! — and that you may see, unloose the 
pitiless barriers — how the door has been made wet 
with my tears ! Surely, when you stood stripped 
and ready for the scourge, and trembling, it was I 
that went to your mistress in your behalf. So, then. 
the act of grace which once availed even for you — 
ah, the outrage! — is the same act now to avail so 
little for me ? Render the return I merit ! 'Tis 
in your power to be grateful ; why do you hinder 
me ? The hours of the night are going ; away with 
the bar from the door ! 

25 Away with it ! — and so may you be forever 
lightened of your long chain, nor .have to drink for 
all time the waters of slavery ! With heart of iron 
you listen as I vainly entreat, O janitor, and the 
door stands rigid with the unyielding oaken brace. 
It is towns beleaguered that look for protection to 
the closing of their gates ; you are in the midst of 
peace, and why fear arms? What will you do to an 
enemy, who thus exclude a lover ? The hours of 
the night are going ; away with the bar from the 
door !

33 I come with no following of soldiers, and 
under arms ; I were alone, were cruel Love not 
at my side. Him, even should I wish, I can nowhere 
dismiss ; ere that, I shall be divided from my very 
self. And so, you see, it is Love, and moderate 
wine coursing through my temples, and a chaplet 
falling from my perfume-laden hair, that are my 
escort. Who would tremble before arms like these ? 
Who would not go to face them ? The hours of 
night are going ; away with the bar from the door ! 

41 You are unyielding ; or does sleep — and may it 
be the ruin of you ! — give to the winds the lover's 
words your ears repulse ? Yet at first, I remember, 
when I wished to escape your eye, you were wakeful 
up to the midnight stars. It may be that you, too, 
have a love, who is resting even now at your side — 
alas, how much better your lot than mine ! Could 
I be only in such case, come hither, hard chains, to 
me ! The hours of the night are going ; away with 
the bar from the door ! 

49 Am I deceived, or did the post sound with the 
turning of the hinge, and was that the hoarse 
signal given by a shaken door ? I am deceived — it 
was only the beating of a gusty wind upon the 
portal. Ah me, how far has that breeze borne 
away my hope ! If thou rememberest well thy stolen 
Orithyia, Boreas, come hither, and beat down with 
thy blast these deaf doors ! Through all the city 
there is silence, and, wet with the crystal dew, the 
hours of the night are passing ; away with the bar 
from the door ! 

57 Rise I myself, better armed, with iron, and 
with the fire I carry in my torch, will soon assail 
your haughty dwelling! Night, and Love, and wine 
are no counsellors of self-restraint ; the first knows 
naught of shame, and Liber and Love know naught 
of fear. All things have I tried, and have moved 
you neither by entreaty nor by threat, O harder 
yourself than your own doors ! Not you were the 
one to be given ward of my beautiful lady-love's 
threshold ; you were fit only to guard a gloomy 
dungeon. 

65 Already rimy Lucifer is setting in motion his 
axles, and the bird of dawn is rousing wretched 
mortals to their tasks. But thou, O chaplet torn from 
my unhappy locks, lie thou there upon the unfeeling 
threshold the whole night through. Thou, when she 
sees thee east down there in the early morn, shalt 
be a witness to my mistress of the time I passed 
so wretchedly. 

71 And you, despite what you are. farewell, 
and receive the honour of my parting word ; O 
unyielding, undisgraced by the admission of the 
lover, fare you well ! You, too, cruel posts with 
your rigid threshold, and you doors with your 
unfeeling beams, you fellow-slaves of him who guards 
you, fare you well ! 


VII 

O friend, if any friend be here, put the shackle 
upon my hands — they have deserved the chain — till 
my madness all is past ! For madness it was that 
moved me to raise reckless hands against my lady- 
love ; my sweetheart is in tears from the hurt of my 
raging blows. 'Twas in me then to lay hands on 
even the parents I love, or to deal out cruel strokes 
even to the holy gods ! 

7 Well ? did not Ajax, too, lord of the seven-fold 
shield, seize and lay low the flocks over the broad 
fields ? and did not Orestes, ill avenger exacting 
from his mother ill vengeance for his sire, dare ask 
for weapons against the mystic goddesses ? What ! 
Had I on that account the right to rend the 
well -wrought hair of my lady-love ? And yet her 
disordered locks did not become her ill. She was 
beautiful so. Such, I should say, was Schoeneus' 
daughter a when she harried the Maenalian wild ; 
such the Cretan maid as she wept that the headlong 
winds of the south had borne away both sails and 
promises of perjured Theseus ; thus was Cassandra — 
except that fillets bound her hair — when down she 
sank at thy shrine, O chaste Minerva. 

19 Who did not say to me : " Madman ! " who 
did not say: "Barbarian!" Herself said naught; 
her tongue was kept from it by trembling fear. But 
her face, for all her silence, uttered reproaches 
none the less ; tears charged me with my crime, 
though her lips were dumb. I would that my arms 
had sooner dropped from their shoulders ; I could 
better have done without a part of myself. I have 
used my maddened strength to my own cost, and 
myself have been strong to my own hurt. What 
have I with you, ye ministers of blood and crime ! 
Unholy hands, submit to the shackles you deserve ! 
What ! if I had struck the least of the Quirites 
among the crowd, should I be punished — and shall 
my right o'er ray lady-love be greater ? The son of 
Tydeus left most vile example of offence. He was 
the first to smite a goddess" — I am the second ! And 
he was less guilty than I. I injured her I profes ed 
to love ; Tydeus' son was cruel with a foe. 

33 Go now. victor, make ready mighty triumphs, 
circle your hair with laurel and pay your vows to 
Jove, and let the thronging retinue that follow 
your car cry out : " Ho ! our valiant hero has been 
victorious over a girl ! " Let her walk before, a 
downcast captive with hair let loose — from head to 
foot pure white, did her wounded cheeks allow ! 
More fit had it been for her to be marked with the 
pressure of my lips, and to bear on her neck the 
print of caressing tooth. Finally, if I must needs 
be swept along like a swollen torrent, and blind 
anger must needs make me its prey, were it not 
enough to have cried out at tile frightened girl, 
without the too hard threats I thundered ? or to 
have shamed her by tearing apart her gown from 
top to middle? — her girdle would have come to the 
rescue there. 

49 But, as it was, I could endure to rend cruelly 
the hair from her brow and mark with my nail 
her free-born cheeks. She stood there bereft of 
sense, with face bloodless and white as blocks of 
marble hewn from Parian cliffs. I saw her limbs all 
nerveless and her frame a-tremble — like the leaves 
of the poplar shaken by the breeze, like the slender 
reed set quivering by gentle Zephyr, or the surface 
of the wave when ruffled by the warm South-wind : 
and the tears, long hanging in her eyes, came 
flowing o'er her cheeks even as water distils from 
snow that is cast aside. 'Twas then that first I 
began to feel my guilt — my blood it was that flowed 
when she shed those tears. Thrice, none the less, I 
would have cast myself before her feet a suppliant ; 
though thrice thrust she back my dreadful hands. 

63 But you, stay not — for your vengeance will 
lessen my grief — from straight assailing my features 
with your nails. Spare neither my eyes nor yet 
my hair : however weak the hand, ire gives it 
strength ; or at least, that the sad signs of my 
misdeed may not survive, once more range in due 
rank your ordered locks. 


VIII 

There is a certain — whoso wishes to know of a 
bawd, let him hear ! — a certain old dame there is by 
the name of Dipsas. Her name a accords with fact — 
she has never looked with sober eye upon black 
Memnon's mother, her of the rosy steeds. 6 She 
knows the ways of magic, and Aeaean incantations, 
and by her art turns back the liquid waters upon 
their source ; she knows well what the herb can 
do, what the thread set in motion by the whirling
magic wheel, what the poison of the mare in 
heat. Whenever she has willed, the clouds are 
rolled together over all the sky ; whenever she has 
willed, the day shines forth in a clear heaven. I 
have seen, if you can believe me, the stars letting 
drop down blood ; crimson with blood was the face 
of Luna. I suspect she changes form and flits about 
in the shadows of night, her aged body covered 
with plumage. I suspect, and rumour bears me out. 
From her eyes, too, double pupils dart their
lightnings, with rays that issue from twin orbs. She 
summons forth from ancient sepulchres the dead of 
generations far remote, and with long incantations 
lays open the solid earth. 

19 This old dame has set herself to profane a 
modest union ; her tongue is none the less
without a baneful eloquence, Chance made me witness 
to what she said ; she was giving these words of 
counsel — the double doors concealed me : " Know 
you, my light, that yesterday you won the favour of 
a wealthy youth ? Caught fast, he could not keep 
his eyes from your face. And why should you not 
win favour ? Second to none is your beauty. Ah 
me, apparel worthy of your person is your lack ! I 
could wish you as fortunate as you are most fair — 
for with you become rich, I shall not be poor. Mars 
with contrary star is what has hindered you. Mars 
is gone ; now favouring Venus' star is here. How her 
rising brings you fortune, lo, behold! A rich lover 
has desired you ; he has interest in your needs. 
He has a face, too, that may match itself with 
yours ; were he unwilling to buy, he were worthy 
to be bought. 

35 My lady blushed. 

"Blushes, to be sure, become a pale face, but 
the blush one feigns is the one that profits ; real 
blushing is wont to be loss. With eyes becomingly 
cast down you will look into your lap, and regard 
each lover according to what he brings. It may be 
that in Tatius' reign the unadorned Sabine fair 
would not be had to wife by more than one : hut 
now in wars far off Mars tries the souls of men, and 
'tis Venus reigns in the city of her Aeneas. The 
beautiful keep holiday ; chaste is she whom no one 
has asked — or, be she not too countrified, she 
herself asks first. Those wrinkles, too, which you 
carry high on your brow, shake off; from the 
wrinkles many a naughtiness will fall." Penelope, 
when she used the bow, was making trial of 
the young men's powers ; of horn was the bow 
that proved their strength. The stream of a lifetime 
glides smoothly on and is past before we know, and 
swift the year glides by with horses at full speed. 
Bronze grows bright with use ; a fair garment asks 
for the wearing ; the abandoned dwelling moulders 
with age and corrupting neglect — and beauty, so 
you open not your doors, takes age from lack of use. 
Nor, do one or two lovers avail enough ; more sure 
your spoil, and less invidious, if from many. 'Tis 
from the flock a full prey comes to hoary wolves. 

57 " Think, what does your fine poet give you 
besides fresh verses ? You will get many thousands 
of lover's lines to read. The god of poets himself 6 
attracts the gaze by his golden robe, and sweeps 
the harmonious chords of a lyre dressed in gold. 
Let him who will give be greater for you than great 
Homer ; believe me, giving calls for genius. And 
do not look down on him if he be one redeemed 
with the price of freedom ; the chalk-marked 
foot is an empty reproach. Nor let yourself be 
deluded by ancient masks about the hall. Take thy 
grandfathers and go, thou lover who art poor ! Nay, 
should he ask your favours without paying because 
he is fair, let him first demand what he may give 
from a lover of his own. 

69 " Exact more cautiously the price while you 
spread the net, lest they take flight ; once taken, 
prey upon them on terms of your own. Nor is there 
harm in pretended love ; allow him to think he is 
loved, and take care lest this love bring you nothing 
in ! Often deny your favours. Feign headache now, 
and now let Isis be what affords you pretext. After 
a time, receive him, lest he grow used to suffering, 
and his love grow slack through being oft repulsed. 
Let your portal be deaf to prayers, but wide to the 
giver ; let the lover you welcome overhear the words 
of the one you have sped ; sometimes, too, when 
you have injured him, be angry, as if injured first — 
charge met by counter-charge will vanish. But 
never give to anger long range of time ; anger 
that lingers long oft causes breach. Nay, even let 
your eyes learn to drop tears at command, and the 
one or the other bedew at will your cheeks ; nor 
fear to swear falsely if deceiving anyone — -Venus 
lends deaf ears to love's deceits. Have slave and 
handmaid skilled to act their parts, to point out 
the apt gift to buy for you ; and have them ask 
little gifts for themselves — if they ask little gifts 
from many persons, there will by-and-bye grow from 
straws a mighty heap. And have your sister and 
your mother, and your nurse, too, keep plucking at 
your lover ; quickly comes the spoil that is sought 
by many hands. When pretext fails for asking gifts, 
have a cake to be sign to him your birthday is come. 
95 "Take care lest he love without a rival, and 
feel secure ; love lasts not well if you give it naught 
to fight. Let him see the traces of a lover o'er all 
your couch, and note about your neck the livid marks 
of passion. Above all else, have him see the presents 
another has sent. If no one has sent, you must ask 
of the Sacred Way." When you have taken from 
him many gifts, in case he still give up not all 
he has, yourself ask him to lend — what you never 
will restore ! Let your tongue aid you, and 
cover up your thoughts — wheedle while you despoil ; 
wicked poisons have for hiding-place sweet honey. 

105 " If you fulfil these precepts, learned by me 
from long experience, and wind and breeze carry 
not my words away, you will often speak me well as 
long as I live, and often pray my bones lie softly 
when I am dead." 

109 Her words were still running, when my 
shadow betrayed me. But my hands could scarce 
restrain themselves from tearing her sparse white 
hair, and her eyes, all lachrymose from wine, and her 
wrinkled cheeks. May the gods give you no abode 
and helpless age, and long winters and everlasting* 
thirst ! 


IX 

Every lover is a soldier, and Cupid has a camp of 
his own ; Atticus, believe me, every lover is a soldier. 
The age that is meet for the wars is also suited to 
Venus. 'Tis unseemly for the old man to soldier, 
unseemly for the old man to love. The spirit that 
captains seek in the valiant soldier is the same the 
fair maid seeks in the man who mates with her. 
Both wake through the night ; on the ground each 
takes his rest — the one guards his mistress's door, 
the other his captain's. The soldier's duty takes 
him a long road ; send but his love before, and the 
strenuous lover, too, will follow without end. He 
will climb opposing mountains and cross rivers 
doubled by pouring rain, he will tread the high- 
piled snows, and when about to ride the seas he 
will not prate of swollen East-winds and look for 
fit stars ere sweeping the waters with his oar. Who 
but either soldier or lover will bear alike the cold 
of night and the snows mingled with dense rain ? 
The one is sent to scout the dangerous foe ; the 
other keeps eyes upon his rival as on a foeman. 
The one besieges mighty towns, the other the 
threshold of an unyielding mistress ; the other 
breaks in doors, the one, gates. 

21 Oft hath it proven well to rush on the enemy 
sunk in sleep, and to slay with armed hand the 
unarmed rout. Thus fell the lines of Thracian 
Rhesus, a and you, O captured steeds, left your lord 
behind. Oft lovers, too, take vantage of the
husband's slumber, and bestir their own weapons while 
the enemy lies asleep. To pass through companies of 
guards and bands of sentinels is ever the task both 
of soldier and wretched lover. Mars is doubtful, 
and Venus, too, not sure ; the vanquished rise 
again, and they fall you would say could never be 
brought low. 

31 Then whoso hath called love spiritless, let him 
cease. Love is for the soul ready for any proof. 
Aflame is great Achilles for Briseis taken away 
men of Troy, crush while ye may, the Argive 
strength ! Hector from Andromache's embrace 
went forth to arms, and 'twas his wife that set the 
helmet on his head. The greatest of captains, 
Atreus' son, they say, stood rapt at sight of Priam's 
daughter, 6 Maenad-like with her streaming hair. 
Mars, too, was caught, and felt the bonds of the 
smith ; no tale was better known in heaven." For 
myself, my bent was all to dally in ungirt idleness ; 
my couch and the shade h had made my temper 
mild. Love for a beautiful girl has started me from 
craven ways and bidden me take service in her camp. 
For this you see me full of action, and waging the 
wars of night. Whoso would not lose all his spirit, 
let him love ! 


X 

Such as was she who was carried from the 
Eurotas in Phrygian keel to be cause of war to 
her two lords ; such as was Leda, whom the cunning 
lover deceived in guise of the bird with gleaming 
plumage ; such as was Amymone," going through 
thirsty fields with full urn pressing the locks on her 
head — such were you ; and in my love for you I 
feared the eagle and the bull, and what other form 
soever love has caused great Jove to take. 

9 Now my fear is all away, and my heart is healed 
of straying ; those charms of yours no longer take 
my eyes. Why am I changed, you ask ? Because 
you demand a price. This is the cause that will 
not let you please me. As long as you were simple, 
I loved you soul and body ; now your beauty is 
marred by the fault of your heart. Love is both a 
child and naked : his guileless years and lack of 
raiment are sign that he is free. Why bid the child 
of Venus offer himself for gain ? He has no pocket 
where to put away his gain ! a Neither Venus nor 
her son is apt at service of cruel amis — it is not 
meet that unwarlike gods should draw the soldier's 
pay. 

21 'Tis the harlot stands for sale at the fixed price 
to anyone soe'er, and wins her wretched gains with 
body at the call ; yet even she calls curses on the 
power of the greedy pander, and does because 
compelled what you perform of your own will. 

25 Look for pattern to the beasts of the field,
unreasoning though they are ; 'twill shame you to find 
the wild things gentler than yourself. Mare never 
claimed gift from stallion, nor cow from bull ; the 
ram courts not the favoured ewe with gift. 'Tis only 
woman glories in the spoil she takes from man, she 
only hires out her favours, she only comes to be 
hired, and makes a sale of what is delight to both 
and what both wished, and sets the price by the 
measure of her own delight. The love that is to 
be of equal joy to both — why should the one make 
sale of it, and the other purchase ? Why should 
my pleasure cause me loss, and yours to you bring 
gain — the pleasure that man and woman both 
contribute to ? 

37 It is not honour for witnesses to make false 
oaths for gain, nor for the chosen juror's purse to lie 
open for the bribe. 'Tis base to defend the wretched 
culprit with purchased eloquence ; the court that 
makes great gains is base ; 'tis base to swell a 
patrimony with a revenue from love, and to offer 
one's own beauty for a price. Thanks are due and 
deserved for boons unbought ; no thanks are felt 
for love that is meanly hired. He who has made 
the hire pays all ; when the price is paid lie remains 
no more a debtor for your favour. Spare, fair ones, 
to ask a price for your love ; a sordid gain can bring 
no good in the end. 'Twas not worth while for the 
holy maid to bargain for the Sabine armlets, only 
that arms should crush her down ; a a son once 
pierced with the sword the bosom whence he came, 
and a necklace was the cause of the mother's pain. 6 

53 And yet it is no shame to ask for presents from 
the rich ; they have wherefrom to give you when 
you ask. Pluck from full vines the hanging clusters ; 
let the genial field of Alcinous yield its fruits ! He 
who is poor counts out to you as pay his service, 
zeal, and faithfulness ; the kind of wealth each has, 
let him bring it all to the mistress of his heart. 
My dower, too, it is to glorify the deserving fair in 
song ; whoever I have willed is made famous by my 
art. Gowns will be rent to rags, and gems and gold 
be broke to fragments; the glory my songs shall 
give will last for ever. 'Tis not the giving hut the 
asking of a price, that I despise and hate. What I 
refuse at your demand, cease only to wish, and I 
will give ! 


XI 

Nape, O adept in gathering and setting in order 
scattered locks, and not to be numbered among 
handmaids, O Nape known for useful ministry in 
the stealthy night and skilled in the giving of the 
signal, oft urging Corinna when in doubt to come 
to me, often found tried and true to me in times 
of trouble — receive and take early to your mistress 
these tablets I have inscribed, and care that 
nothing hinder or delay ! Your breast has in it 
no vein of Hint or unyielding iron, nor are you 
simpler than befits your station. One could believe 
you, too, had felt the darts of Cupid — in aiding 
me defend the standards of your own campaigns ! 
Should she ask how I fare, you will say 'tis my 
hope of her favour that lets me live ; as for the rest, 
'tis charactered in the wax by my fond hand. 

15 While I speak, the hour is Hying. Give her the 
tablets while she is happily free, but none the less 
see that she reads them straight. Regard her eyes 
and brow, I enjoin you, as she reads ; though 
she speak not, you may know from her face 
what is to come. And do not wait, but bid her 
write much in answer when she has read ; I hate 
when a fine, fair page is widely blank. See she 
pack the lines together, and long detain mv eyes 
with letters traced on the outermost marge. 

23 What need to tire her fingers by holding of the 
pen ? Let the whole tablet have writ on it only 
this : "Come!" Then straight would I take tin 
conquering tablets, and bind them round with laurel, 
and hang them in the mid of Venus' shrine. I 
would write beneath : '' to VENUS NASO DEDICATES HIS 
FAITHFUL AIDS; YET BUT NOW YOU WERE ONLY MEAN 
MAPLE." 


XII 

Weep for my misfortune — my tablets have returned 
with gloomy news ! The unhappy missive says : 
" Not possible to-day." There is something in omens ; 
just now as Nape would leave, she tripped her toe 
upon the threshold and stopped. When next you 
are sent abroad, remember to take more care as von 
cross, and soberly to lift your foot full clear ! 

7 Away from me, ill-natured tablets, funereal 
pieces of wood, and you, wax close writ with characters
that will say me nay! — wax which I think was 
gathered from the flower of the long hemlock by 
the bee of Corsica and sent us under its ill-famed 
honey. Yet you had a blushing hue, as if tinctured 
deep with minium — but that colour was really a colour 
from blood. Lie there at the crossing of the ways, 
where I throw you, useless sticks, and may the 
passing wheel with its heavy load crush you ! Yea, 
and the man who converted you from a tree to an' 
object for use, I will assure you, did not have pure 
hands. That tree, too, lent itself to the hanging of 
some wretched neck, and furnished the cruel cross to 
the executioner; it gave its foul shade to hoarse 
horned owls, and its branches bore up the eggs of 
the screech-owl and the vulture. To tablets like 
these did I insanely commit my loves and give my 
tender words to be carried to my lady ? More fitly 
would such tablets receive the wordy bond, for some 
judge to read in dour tones ; 'twere better they 
should lie among day-ledgers, and accounts in which 
some miser weeps o'er money spent. 

27 Yes, I heave found you double in your dealings, 
to accord with your name." Your very number was 
an augury not good. What prayer should I make in 
my anger, unless that rotten old age eat you away, 
and your wax grow colourless from foul neglect? 


XIII 

She is coming already over the ocean from her 
too-ancient husband — she of the golden hair who 
with rimy axle brings the day. 

3 " Whither art thou hasting, Aurora ? Stay ! — so 
may his birds each year make sacrifice to the shades 
of Memnon their sire in the solemn combat ! 'Tis 
now I delight to lie in the tender arms of my love ; 
if ever, 'tis now I am happy to have her close by my 
side. Now, too, slumber is deep and the air is cool, 
and birds chant liquid song from their slender throats. 
Whither art thou hasting, O unwelcome to men, 
unwelcome to maids ? Check with rosy hand the 
dewy rein ! 

11 " Before thy rising the seaman better observes 
his stars, and does not wander blindly in mid water; 
at thy coming rises the wayfarer, however wearied, 
and the soldier fits his savage hands to arms. Thou 
art the first to look on men tilling the field with the 
heavy mattock ; thou art the first to summon the 
slow-moving steer beneath the curved yoke. Thou 
cheatest boys of their slumbers and givest them over 
to the master, that their tender hands may yield to 
the cruel stroke ; and likewise many dost thou send 
as sponsors before the court, to undergo great losses 
through a single word. Thou bringest joy neither 
to lawyer nor to pleader ; each is ever compelled to 
rise for cases new. 'Tis thou, when women might 
cease from toil, who callest back to its task the hand 
that works the wool. 

25 " I could endure all else — but who, unless he 
were one without a maid, could bear that maids 
should rise betimes ? How often have I longed 
that night should not give place to thee, that the 
stars should not be moved to fly before thy face ! 
How often have I longed that either the wind should 
break thine axle, or thy steed be tripped by dense 
cloud, and fall ! O envious, whither dost thou haste ? 
The son born to thee was black, and that colour 
was the hue of his mother's heart. 

35 " I Would Tithonus were free to tell of thee ; 
no woman in heaven would be known for greater 
shame. Flying from him because long ages older, 
thou risest early from the ancient man to go to 
the chariot-wheels he hates. Yet, hadst thou thy 
favoured Cephalus in thy embrace, thou wouldst cry : 
' Run softly, steeds of night ! ' 

4i a Why should I be harried in love because thy 
mate is wasting with years ? Didst thou wed an 
ancient man because I made the match ? Look, how 
many hours of slumber has Luna bestowed upon the 
youth she loves ! a — and her beauty is not second to 
thine. The very father of the gods, that he need 
not see thee so oft, made two nights into one to 
favour his desires."

47 I had brought my chiding to an end. You 
might know she had heard : she blushed — and yet 
the day arose no later than its wont ! 


XIV 

I used to say: "Stop drugging that hair of yours !" 
Now you have no locks to dye ! Yet, had you suffered 
it, what were more abundant than they ? They bad 
come to touch your side even to its lowest part. 
Yes, and they were fine in texture, so fine that you 
feared to dress them ; they were like the gauzy 
coverings the dark-skinned Seres wear, or the thread 
drawn out by the slender foot of the spider when he 
weaves his delicate work beneath the deserted beam. 
And yet their colour was not black, nor yet was it 
golden, but, although neither, a mingling of both 
hues — such as in the dewy vales of precipitous Ida 
belongs to the lofty cedar stripped of its bark. 

13 Add that they were both docile and suited to a 
hundred ways of winding, and never caused you 
whit of pain. The needle did not tear them, nor 
the palisade of the comb. The hair-dresser's person 
was ever safe ; oft has my love's toilet been made 
before my eyes, and she never snatched up hairpin 
to wound her servant's arms. Often, too, in early 
morning when her hair was not yet dressed, she has 
lain half supine on her purple couch. Even then, in 
her neglect, she was comely, like a Thracian Bacchante 
lying careless and wearied on the green turf. 

23 And yet, seeing they were delicate and like 
to down, alas, what woes were theirs, and what 
tortures they endured ! With what patience did 
they yield themselves to iron and fire to form the 
close-curling ringlet with its winding orb ! I kept 
crying out : " 'T is crime, 't is crime to burn those 
tresses ! They are beautiful of themselves ; spare 
your own head, O iron-hearted girl ! Away from 
there with force ! That is no hair should feel the 
fire ; your curls themselves can school the irons you 
apply ! " • 

31 The beautiful tresses are no more — such as 
Apollo could desire, such as Bacchus could desire, 
for their own heads ! I could compare with them the 
tresses which nude Dione is painted holding up of 
yore with dripping fingers." Why do you lament the 
ruin of your ill-ordered hair ? why lay aside your 
mirror with sorrowing hand, silly giri ? You are 
gazed upon by yourself with eyes not well accustomed 
to the sight ; to find pleasure there, you must forget 
your old-time self. No rival's enchanted herbs have 
wrought you ill, no treacherous grandam has laved 
your hair with water from Haemonian land ; nor 
has violent illness harmed — far from us he the omen ! 
— nor envious tongue diminished your dense locks. 
The loss you feel was wrought you by your own hand 
and fault ; yourself applied the mingled poison to 
your head. 

45 Now Germany will send you tresses from captive 
women ; you will be adorned by the bounty of the 
race we lead in triumph. O how oft, when someone 
looks at your hair, will you redden, and say : " The 
ware I have bought is what brings me favour now. 
'T is some Sygambrian woman that yonder one is 
praising now, instead of me. Yet I remember when 
that glory was my own." 

51 Ah, wretched me ! Scarce keeping back her 
tears, with her right hand she covers her face, her 
generous cheeks o'er painted with blushing. The 
hair of yore she holds in her lap and gazes upon — 
alas, me ! a gift unworthy of that place. 

55 Calm your heart, and stop your tears ! Your 
loss is one may be repaired. Not long, and you will 
be admired for locks your very own. 


XV 

Why, biting Envy, dost thou charge me with 
slothful years, and call my song the work of an idle 
wit, complaining that, while vigorous age gives 
strength, I neither, after the fashion of our fathers, 
pursue the dusty prizes of a soldier's life, nor learn 
garrulous legal lore, nor set my voice for common 
case in the ungrateful forum ? 

7 It is but mortal, the work you ask of me ; but my 
quest is glory through all the years, to be ever known 
in song throughout the earth. Maeonia's son a will 
live as long as Tenedos shall stand, and Ida, as 
long as Simois shall roll his waters rushing to the 
sea ; the poet of Ascra, too, will live as long as 
the grape shall swell for the vintage, as long as 
Ceres shall fall beneath the stroke of the curving 
sickle. The son of Battus shall aye be sung through 
all the earth ; though he sway not through genius, 
he sways through art. No loss shall ever come to 
the buskin of Sophocles ; as long as the sun and 
moon Aratus shall live on ; as long as tricky slave, 
hard father, treacherous bawd, and wheedling harlot 
shall be found, Menander will endure ; Ennius the 
rugged in art, and Accius of the spirited tongue, 
possess names that will never fade. Varro and the 
first of ships — what generation will fail to know 
of them, and of the golden fleece, the Aesonian 
chieftain's quest ? The verses of sublime Lucretius 
will perish only then when a single day shall give 
the earth to doom. Tityrus and the harvest, and 
the arms of Aeneas, will be read as long as Rome 
shall be capital of the world she triumphs o'er ; as 
long as flames and bow are the arms of Cupid, thy 
numbers shall be conned, O elegant Tibullus ; Gallus 
shall be known to Hesperia's sons, and Gallus to the 
sons of Eos, and known with Gallus shall his own 
Lycoris be. 

31 Yea, though hard rocks and though the tooth 
of the enduring ploughshare perish with passing 
time, song is untouched by death. Before song let 
monarchs and monarchs' triumphs yield' — yield, too, 
the bounteous banks of Tagus bearing gold ! Let 
what is cheap excite the marvel of the crowd ; for 
me may golden Apollo minister full cups from the 
Castalian fount, and may I on my locks sustain the 
myrtle that fears the cold ; and so be ever conned 
by anxious lovers ! It is the living that Envy feeds 
upon ; after doom it stirs no more, when each man's 
fame guards him as he deserves. I, too, when the 
final fires have eaten up my frame, shall still live on, 
and the great part of me survive my death. 