I 

Ancient, and spared by the axe through many 
years, there stands a grove ; yon could believe a deity 
indwelt the place. A sacred spring is in its midst, 
and a cave with overhanging rock, and from every 
side comes the sweet complaint of birds. 

5 Whilst I was strolling here enveloped in
woodland shadows, asking myself what work my Muse 
should venture on — came Elegy with coil of odorous 
locks, and, I think, one foot longer than its mate. 
She had a comely form, her robe was gauzy light, 
her face suffused with love, and the fault in her
carriage added to her grace. There came, too, raging 
Tragedy, with mighty stride : her locks o'erhung a 
darkling brow, her pall trailed on the "round ; her 
left hand swayed wide a kingly sceptre, and on her 
foot was the high-bound Lydian buskin. 

15 And she was first to speak: "Will there ever 
be an end to thy making love,'' she said, " O poet 
ever clinging to thy theme ? Thy worthless ways 
are the talk at dinners over wine, the talk at the 
crossings cut by many roads. Oft someone points 
with finger to the bard as he passes, and says: 
' He, he is the one tierce Love is burning up ! ' Thou 
art not ware, but thou art tossed on the tongues of 
all the city while, casting away all shame, thou 
bruitest abroad thy deeds. "tis time thou wert 
stirred by the stroke of a greater thyrsus ; a thou 
hast dallied enough — enter on greater work ! Thy 
theme obscures thy genius. Sing deeds of heroes. 
'This/ thou wilt say, 'is the race for my soul to 
run !' Thy Muse has been but playing — with matter 
for tender maiden's song — and thy first youth has 
been given to numbers that belong to youth. Now, 
let me, Roman Tragedy, win through thee renown ! 
Thou hast the inspiration will fulfill my needs." 

31 Thus far she spake, and, stately on her painted 
buskins, shook thrice and four times her head with 
its clustered hair. The other, if I remember, cast 
sidelong eyes on me, and smiled — am I mistaken, or 
was a branch of myrtle in her hand ? 

35 " Why weary me with your heavy words, O 
haughty Tragedy ? " she said ; " or can you never be 
otherwise than heavy ? Yet you have deigned to 
suit yourself to unequal numbers ; in assailing me 
'twas my verse you used. I would not compare 
your lofty strains with mine ; your queenly hall
o'ershadows my humble doors. I am but light, and 
Cupid, my heart's fond care, is light as well ; 
myself am not stronger than the theme I sing. The 
mother of sportive Love, without me, would be but a 
rustic jade ; to be go-between and comrade to this 
goddess was I brought forth. The door which you 
will never unbolt with your austere buskin — that 
door lies freely open before my blandishments ; and 
yet I have earned this greater power than yours by 
bearing much your haughty brow would not endure. 
Through me Corinna has learned to elude her guard 
and tamper with the faith of tight-closed door, to 
slip away from her couch in tunic ungirdled and 
move in the night with unstumbling foot. O how 
oft have I been graved on unyielding doors, not 
shaming there to be read by the passer by !" Nay, 
once I mind I was sent in keeping of a slave, hid 
away in her bosom till the fierce guard went. How, 
when you send me as a birthday gift, and my dear 
barbarian rends me, and drowns me in the water 
standing near ? 'Twas I who first made swell the 
fruitful seeds of your mind ; to me you owe it that 
she who stands yonder claims you now." 

61 She had ceased. I began : " By both and each 
of you I pray, let my fearful words find your cars 
attentive. One honours me with sceptre and lofty 
buskin ; my tongue already feels thy touch, and 
mighty speech is on my lips. The other gives 
everlasting glory to my love — come, then, and join 
short verses with the long ! Indulge thy bard a 
short space, O Tragedy ! A labour eternal art thou ; 
what she asks is but brief." 

69 She was moved, and granted my prayer — let the 
tender Loves come hasting, while I am free ; close 
after me presses a greater task ! 


II 

"I sit not here because fond of high-bred horses ; 
yet, the one you favour I pray may win. 6 To talk 
with you I came, and to sit with you, so that you 
might not miss knowing the love you stir. You 
gaze on the races, I on you ; let us both gaze on 
what delights, both feast our own eyes. 

7 " O, happy driver, whoe'er he be, that wins your 
favour ! Ah. so 'twas he had tin* fortune to enlist 
your concern ? Be that fortune mine, and when my 
coursers dash from the starting-chamber, with
fearless heart will I tread the car and urge them on, 
now giving the rein, now striping their hacks with 
the lash, now grazing the turning-post with inner 
wheel. Have I caught sight of you as I carter, 
I will stop, and the reins, let go from my hands, 
will drop. Yea, how mar Pelops came to falling by 
Pisaean spear while Looking on thy face, Hippodamia ! 
Yet he won, of course through the favour of his lady. 
May we owe our victories, all of us, to the favour of 
our loves ! 

19 " Why draw back from me ? — 'twill do no good ; 
the line compels us to sit close/' This advantage 
the circus gives, with its rule of space — yet you 
there on the right, whoever you are, have a care ; 
your pressing against my lady's side annoys. You, 
too, who are looking on from behind, draw tip your 
legs, if you care for decency, and press not her back 
with your hard knee ! 

25 " But your cloak is let fall too far, and is trailing 
on the ground. Gather it up — or look, with my 
own fingers I'll get it up. Envious wrap you were, 
to cover such pretty limbs! And the more one 
looks — ah, envious wrap you were ! Such were the 
limbs of fleet Atalanta that Milanion burned to 
hold up with his hands. Such in pictures are the 
limbs of upgirt Diana pursuing the bold wild beasts, 
herself more bold than they. I burned before, when 
I had not seen ; what will become of me now that I 
have? You add flames to flame, and waters to the 
sea. I suspect from them that all else, too. that 
lies well hidden under your delicate gown, might 
please. 

37 " Would you like, while we wait, to bid soft 
breezes blow ? Ill take the fan in my hand and 
start them. Or is this rather the heat of my heart 
and not of the air, and does love for a woman burn 
my ravished breast ? While I am talking, a sprinkling
of light dust has got on your white dress. Vile 
dust, away from this snowy body ! 

43 " But now the procession is coming — keep silence 
all, and attend ! The time for applause is here — the 
golden procession is coming/ I First in the train 
is Victory, borne with wings outspread — come hither, 
goddess, and help my love to win ! Applaud 
Neptune, ye who trust o'ermuch the wave ! Naught 
will I with the sea ; I choose that the land keep me. 
Applaud thy Mars, () soldier ! Arms I detest ; peace 
is my delight, and love that is found in the midst 
of peace. And Phoebus — let him be gracious to 
augurs, and Phoebe gracious to huntsmen ! Minerva, 
turn in applause to thee the craftsman's hands ! Ye 
country dwellers, rise to Ceres and tender Bacchus ! 
Let the boxer court Pollux, the horseman Castor ! 
We, winsome Venus, we applaud thee, and thy 
children potent with the bow ; smile, () goddess, 
upon my undertakings, and put the right mind in 
my heart's new mistress ! Let her endure to be 
loved ! 

58 " She nodded, and by the movement gave 
favouring sign. What the goddess lias promised, 
yourself promise, I ask ; with Venus' permission let 
me say it, you will be the greater goddess. I swear 
to you by all these witnesses and by the train of 
the gods, I am asking you to be for all time to come 
my queen ! 

63 " But your feet are dangling. If you like, you 
you can stick your toes in the grating. The circus 
is clear now for the greatest part of the shows, and 
the praetor has started the four-horse cars from the 
equal barrier." I see the one you are eager for. He 
will win if he has your favour, whoever he be. 
What you desire the very horses seem to know ! Ah, 
miserable me, he has circled the post in a wide 
curve ! What are you doing ? The next hugs close 
with his axle, and gains on you. What are you 
doing, wretch ? You will lose my love the prayer of 
her heart. Pull, I entreat, the left rein with all 
your might ! We are favouring a good-for-naught — 
but call them back, Quirites, and toss your togas in 
signal from every side ! See, they call them 
back ! — but for fear a waving toga spoil your hair, 
come, you may hide your head in the folds of my 
cloak. 

77 "And now the starting-chambers are unbarred 
again, and the gates are open wide ; the many- 
coloured rout comes flying forth with reins let loose 
to their steeds. This time, at least, get past them, 
and bend to your work on the open space ! See 
that you fulfil my vows, and my lady-love's ! 

81 " Fulfilled are my lady-love's vows, but my vows 
remain. Yon charioteer has received his palm ; my 
palm is yet to be won." 

83 She smiled, and with speaking eyes promised — 
I know not what. 

84 "That is enough for here — in some other place 
render the rest ! " 


III 

Go, believe there are gods — she swore and has 
failed her oath, and still her face is fair, as 
'twas before ! She has» hair as Long since she
insulted the gods, as she had still un forsworn.
Before, she was dazzling fair, and her fairness was 
mingled with rosy red' — the rosy red still glows in 
her snowy cheeks. Her foot was small — her foot 
is still of daintiest form. She was tall and handsome 
— tall and handsome she remains. She had sparkling 
eyes — like stars still beam the eyes by which she has 
often falsely lied to me. Surely, the gods, too. indulge 
the fair in eternal swearing false, and beaut v has its 
privilege divine. By her own eyes not long ago 
she swore, I mind me, and by mine — and mine have 
been the ones to smart ! 

15 Say, O ye gods, if she deceived you and has 
gone unpunished, why have I borne the pains for 
another's desert? Or is Cepheus '.daughter no
reproach to you — she whom you hade to die for her 
mother's ill-starred beauty?" Is it not enough 
that I have found your witness without weight, and 
that unpunished she makes the gods her mirth as 
well as me? That she may redeem her perjuries, 
am I to suffer, and, though deceived, be victim 
to my deceiver? Either God is a name without 
substance and feared for naught, moving peoples 
through stupid trustfulness, or, if there is a god, 
he is in love with the tender fair, and too quick to 
ordain that they a lout may do all things. 'Tis 
against us men that Mars girds on death-dealing 
sword ; 'tis we are the target for the spear from 
unconquered Pallas' hand. For us are bent Apollo's 
flexile bows ; on us descends the bolt from Jove's 
upraised right hand. Fair women the gods on high 
fear to offend even when wronged, and stand in 
awe themselves of those who have felt no awe of 
them. And does anyone care to place pious incense 
on their altars ? Surely, there should be more 
courage in men ! 

35 Jove hurls his own lightning on sacred groves 
and citadels, and forbids his bolts to strike the fair 
forsworn. So many have deserved his stroke — 
hapless Semele alone has burned ! Her own
complaisance brought the penalty upon her ; yet, had 
she shunned the coming lover, the father would not 
have filled the mother's office in Bacchus' birth. a 

41 Why complain I, and scold in the face of all 
heaven ? Gods, too, have eyes, gods, too, have 
hearts ! Were I myself divine, unharmed might 
women cheat my godhead with lying lips. I myself 
would swear that womankind swore true, nor let 
myself be called a god of the austere sort. Yet 
you, my lady, make more measured use of their gift 
— or spare, at least, my eyes !


IV 

Hard husband, by setting a keeper over your 
tender wife you nothing gain; 'tis her own nature 
must be each woman's guard. If she is pure when 
freed from even fear, then first is she pure; she 
who sins not because she may not — she sins ! 
Grant you have guarded well the body, tin- mind 
is untrue; and no watch can be set o'er a woman's 
will. Nor can you guard her body, though you shut 
every door ; with all shut out, a traitor will be within. 
She to whom erring is free, errs less; very power 
makes less quick the seeds of sin. Ah, trust to 
me, and cease to spur on to fault by forbidding : 
indulgence will be the apter way to win. 

13 But recently I saw a horse rebellious against 
the curb take bit in his obstinate mouth and career 
like thunderbolt; he Stopped the very moment he 
felt the rein was given, and the lines were lying loose 
on his flying mane ! We ever strive for what is 
forbid, and ever covet what is denied ; so the sick man 
longingly hangs over forbidden water. A hundred 
eyes before, a hundred behind, had Argus — and 
these Love alone did oft deceive; the chamber of 
Danae was eternally strong with iron and rock, yet 
she who had been given a maid to its keeping
became a mother. Penelope, although without a guard, 
remained inviolate among SO many youthful wooers. 

25 Whatever is guarded we desire [he more, and 
care itself invites the thief ; few love what another 
concedes. And that fair one of yours wins not 
because of her beauty, but because of her husband's 
love 'y. something there is, they think, for you to 
be smitten with. She whom her husband guards 
is not made honest thereby, but a mistress much 
desired; fear itself gives her greater price than her 
charms. Re wrathful if you will, 'tis forbidden 
joys delight ; she only charms whoe'er can say : " I 
fear!" And vet 'tis not right to watch a free-born 
wife — let this fear vex women of other blood than 
ours ! a Is your wife, forsooth, to be chaste merely 
that her keeper may say : " I am the cause '' — merely 
for the glory of your slave ? 

37 He is too countrified who is hurt when his wife 
plays false, and is but slightly acquaint with the 
manners of the city in which the sons of Mars were 
born not without reproach — Romulus, child of Ilia, 
and Ilia's child Remus. Why did you marry a 
beauty if none but a chaste would suit ? Those 
two things can never in any wise combine. 

43 If you are wise, indulge your lady ; put off 
stern looks and do not insist on the rights of a rigid 
husband, and cherish the friends your wife will 
bring — and she will bring many ! You will be in 
great favour thus, and with very little effort ; thus 
will you find yourself ever going to dine with 
the young, and at home see many presents not of 
your giving. 


V

"'Twas night, and slumber weighed my weary 
eyelids down — when a vision terrified my soul. 
'Twas on this wise : 

3 " At the foot of a sunny hill was a grove thick- 
standing with ilex, and in its branches was hidden 
many a bird. Near by was a plot of deepest green, a 
grassy mead, humid with the tricklings of gently 
sounding water. I was seeking refuge from the 
heat beneath the branches of the trees — -though 
beneath the trees' branches came none the less 
the heat — when lo ! coining to crop the herbage 
mingled with varied flowers there stood before my 
eyes a shining white heifer, more shining white 
than snows just freshly fallen and not yet turned 
by time to flowing waters ; more shining white 
than the milk that gleams with still hissing foam, 
and has just left the sheep drained dry. A bull was 
companion to her, a happy consort he, and pressed 
the tender ground beside his mate. 

17 " While he lay there, slowly chewing the grassy 
cud that rose again, and feeding a second time on 
what he had fed on before, in my vision I thought 
that sleep took away his power of holding up his 
head, and he laid its horned weight upon the earth. 
Thither, gliding down through the air, on pinions 
light, came a crow, and settled chattering on the 
verdant ground, and, pecking thrice with wanton 
beak at the breast of the snowy heifer, carried 
away in his mouth white tufts of hair. The heifer, 
lingering long, went away from the place and from 
the bull — but a darkly livid mark was on her 
breast; and, seeing bulls afar cropping the pasturage — 
there were bulls cropping the glad pasturage 
afar — she ran quickly thither and mingled with 
those herds, choosing the ground where the herbage 
was more lush. 

31 " Come, tell me, augur of visions by night,
whoe'er thou art, what mean those things I saw, if 
aught they hide of truth." 

33 Thus I ; and thus spake the augur of visions 
by night, weighing in mind each single thing I 
said : 

35 "The heat you wished to shun beneath the 
fluttering leaves, and shunned but ill, was the heat 
of love. The heifer was your love — that colour 
matches your love. You, her beloved, were the bull 
with the heifer for mate. The pecking of her 
breast by the crow's sharp beak meant a pandering 
old dame was meddling with your mistress' heart. 
The lingering long e'er the heifer left her bull 
was sign that you will be left cold in a deserted bed. 
The dark colour and the black spots on her breast 
in front were signs that her heart is not without 
stain of unfaithfulness." 

45 The interpreter had said. I was cold ; the 
blood fled from my face, and before my eyes stood 
deep night. 


VI 

O stream whose muddy banks are choked with 
reeds, I am in haste to see my lady-love — stay for a 
little time thy waters ! Neither hast thou bridges, 
nor hollowed boat to carry me without stroke of 
oar by cable stretched across. Small wert thou, I 
remember, nor did I fear to cross, and thy highest 
water scarce touched my ankles. Now the snows 
have melted from the near-by mountain, and thou 
art rushing on, rolling gross waters in muddy, 
whirling floods. What boots it I have hastened, what 
that I gave scant hours to rest, what that I have 
linked day to night, if I yet must stand here, if 
by no art I may press with my foot the farther 
shore ? 'Tis now I wish I had the pinions the hero 
son of Danae wore when he bare away the head 
thick-tressed with dreadful snakes ; a now I wish 
a Perseus, slayer of the Medusa, with winged sandals. 
that mine were the car from which first came the 
seeds of Ceres when cast on the unfilled ground. a 
But the wonders whereof I speak are false tales of 
olden bards ; no day e'er brought them forth, and 
no day will. 

19 Do thou choose rather, O stream poured wide 
beyond thy capacious banks — so mayst thou flow on 
for ever — to glide within thy bounds ! Thine, O 
torrent, will be hate unbearable, believe, if I
perchance am said to have been kept by thee — I, a 
lover ! Rivers ought to aid young men in love ; what 
love is, rivers themselves have felt. The Inachus, 
they say, went pale for Bithynian Melie, and his 
chill waves felt love's warmth. Not yet had Troy 
been under siege two lustrums when Neaera ravished 
thine eyes, O Xanthus. What ? did not Alpheus 
flow in far-separate lands, driven by faithful love 
for Arcadian maid ? Thou, too, Peneus, they say 
didst hide away, in the land of the Phthiotes, 
Creusa, promised bride to Xuthus. Why call to 
mind Asopus, smitten with Thebe, child of Mars — 
Thebe, destined mother of daughters five ? If I 
ask of thee, Achelous, where are now thy horns, 
thou wilt complain of their breaking by wrathful 
Hercules' hand ; what neither Calydon could win 
from him, nor all Aetolia, Deianira none the less 
alone could win. Rich Nile yonder, who flows 
through seven mouths and hides so well the
homeland of his mighty waters, 'tis said could not drown 
out with his own floods the fires Asopus' child 
Euanthe kindled in him. Enipeus, to dry himself 
for the arms of Salmoneus' child, bade his waters 
retire ; the waters, so bid, retired. 

45 Nor do I pass thee by, stream tumbling over 
the hollowed rocks and moisting the fruit-bearing 
acres of Argive Tibur, thee whom Ilia" charmed, ill 
kept though she appeared, with hair that showed 
the nail, and cheeks that showed the nail.
Bemoaning the crime of her uncle and the wrongs of 
Mars, with unshod feet she wandered through lone 
places. Her did eager Anio behold, looking forth 
from his sweeping floods, and reared from amid 
the wave his hoarse-toned mouth, and " Why dost 
thou anxiously," thus spake he, " tread my shores, 
O Ilia, blood of Idaean Laomedon ? Whither hath 
gone thy comely raiment ? Why art abroad alone, 
with no white fillet to keep thy hair bound up ? 
Why art thou weeping, and staining thine eyes with 
dropping tears ? and why dost lay open and beat 
thy breast with maddened hand ? He hath both 
flint and native iron in his breast who can look 
unmoved on the tears in thy tender eyes. Ilia, lay 
aside thy fears ! To thee my royal hall shall 
open, and thee my waves shall honour. Ilia, lav 
aside thy fears ! Thou shalt be mistress among a 
hundred nymphs, or more ; for a hundred, or more, 
are the nymphs that dwell in my stream. Only 
spurn me not, I entreat, thou sprung of the Trojan 
line ; thou shalt win gifts of greater richness than 
my promise." 

67 He had said. She stood with modest eyes 
downcast upon the ground, letting spray on her 
tender bosom a rain of tears. Thrice made she 
to flee, and thrice stopped she beside the deep 
flood, her power of flying swept away by fear. Yet, 
after long time, rending her hair with unfriendly 
finger, she sounded with trembling lips the words her 
wrongs called forth : " Oh, would that my bones had 
been gathered and laid away in the tomb of my 
fathers when they yet could be gathered the bones 
of a maid ! Why, but now a Vestal, am I bid to 
any marriage-torch, disgraced and to be denied my 
place at Ilion's altar-fires ? a Why tarry I alive to 
be pointed out a jade by the ringer of the crowd ? 
Perish the face that bears the brand of shame and 
disrespect ! " 

79 Thus far, and she held her cloak before her 
tumid eyes, gave up all hope, and so threw herself 
into the rushing waters. The smooth-gliding stream, 
they say, laid his hands to her breast and bore her 
up, and shared with her the rights of the wedded 
couch. 

83 Thou, too, 'tis easy to believe, hast warmed 
for some fair maid ; but grove and forest cover 
up thy fault. Even while I speak, thy waters have 
grown more deep and wide, and thy channel, though 
deep, contains not the headlong waves. What have 
I with thee, mad stream ? Why dost thou defer 
the joys I am to share ? Why dost thou, churl, 
break off the journey I have begun ? What ? wert 
thou called rightly stream, wert thou a river of 
name, were thine greatest fame o'er all the earth — 
but thou hast no name, thou art but gathered 
from failing rivulets, and hast neither fountain-source 
nor fixed abode ! In place of source thou hast only 
the rain and the melted snows, riches that sluggish 
winter serves to thee ; either thou runnest a 
muddy course in the brumal time, or hast a dried 
and dusty bed. What thirsty farer has e'er been 
able then to drink of thee ? Who in grateful tone 
has said of thee : " Mayst thou flow on for ever ? " 
Thou art a current harmful to the flocks, more 
harmful to the fields. These wrongs perhaps touch 
others ; me my own wrongs touch. 

101 To a stream like this — out upon it ! — I was 
fool enough to tell of the loves of rivers ! I shame 
to have uttered unworthily names so great. To 
think that, • looking on this nothing of a stream, I 
could mention your names, Aehelous and Inachus, 
and thine, O Nile ! Indeed, for thee, as thou 
deservest, O torrent aught but clear, I pray that 
suns be ever fierce and winter ever dry ! 


VIII 

And does anyone still respect the freeborn arts, 
or deem tender verse brings any dower ? Time was 
when genius was more precious than gold ; but now 
to have nothing is monstrous barbarism. When my 
little books have won my lady, where my books 
could go, I may not go myself; when she has praised 
me heartily, to him she has praised the door is closed. 
Disgracefully hither and thither I go, for all my 
pod's gift. 

9 Look you, a newly-rich, a knight a fed fat on 
blood, who won his rating by dealing wounds, is 
preferred to me ! A being like that can you, my life, 
embrace with your beautiful arms ? In such a one's 
embrace, my life, can you let yourself be clasped ? If 
you do not know, that head used to wear a helmet ; 
a sword was girt to the side that now serves you ; 
that left hand, which now the late-gotten gold 
ring so ill becomes/' has carried a shield ; that 
right hand — touch it ! — has been stained with blood. 
The hand by which someone has died — can you 
touch that right hand ? Alas ! where is the
tenderness of heart you had ? Look at those scars, 
marks of the bygone fight — that man has earned 
with his body whatever he has. Perhaps he could 
even tell you how many times he has plunged the 
steel in a human throat. Do you touch, greedy 
girl, hands that tell such tales ? and do I, the 
unstained priest of Phoebus and the Muses, sing 
verses all in vain before your unyielding doors ? 
Ah, ve who are wise, learn not what we know, we 
sluggards, but to follow battle's alarms and the 
fierce tented field, and marshall, in place of good 
verse, the foremost spears ! This, Homer, had been 
thy fortune, didst thou wish. 

29 Jove, knowing well that naught was more 
potent than gold, himself became the price of a 
maid's betrayal. 6 So long as there was no gain to 
get, hard was the father, the maid herself severe, 
brazen the door, and iron the tower ; yet when 
the astute lover had come in the form of ;i price, 
the maid herself opened her arms and gave her 
favours at command. But when ancient Saturn had 
his kingdom in the sky, the deep earth held lucre 
all in its dark embrace. Copper and silver and gold 
and heavy iron he had hid away in the lower realms, 
and there was no massy metal. Yet better were 
his gifts — increase without the curved share, and 
fruits and honeys brought to light from the hollow 
oak. And no one broke the glebe with the strong 
share, no measurer marked the limit of the soil, 
they did not sweep the seas, stirring the waters with 
dipping oar ; the shore in those days was the utmost 
path for man. 

45 Thine own genius, O human kind, hath been 
thy foe, and thy wit o'er great to thine own undoing. 
What boots it thee to girdle cities with towered walls ? 
What boots it to place the weapon in hands at 
strife ? What was the sea to thee — with the land 
thou shouldst have been content ! Why dost not 
aspire to the skies, too, for a third dominion ? 
Where thou mayst, thou dost pretend to the skies 
as well — Quirinus has his temple, and Liber, and 
Alcides, and Caesar now. We draw from the earth, 
instead of increase, the massy gold. The soldier 
possesses wealth begotten of his blood. The senate 
is closed to the poor — -'tis rating brings office ; 'tis 
that gives the juror weight, 'tis that makes a 
pattern of the knight ! 

57 Let them have all ; let these have Campus and 
Forum slaves to them, and those rule the issues 
of peace and bloody war — only let them not in 
their greed buy away our loves, and let them leave 
something — 'tis enough — for the poor to win ! 
But now, though she I love match the austere 
Sabine dames, he who has much to give commands 
her as if a captive ; while I — am denied by her 
guard ; when it comes to me, she fears her husband. 
If I chance to have given, both guard and husband 
will leave me the whole house free ! O were there 
only some god to avenge the neglected lover, and 
change to dust gains so ill-got. 


IX 

If Memnon was bewailed by his mother, if a 
mother bewailed Achilles, and if sad fates are 
touching to great goddesses, be thou in tears, 
O Elegy, and loose thine undeserving hair ! Ah, 
all too truthful now will be thy name ! — he, that 
singer of thy strain, that glory of thine, Tibullus, 
lies burning on the high-reared pyre, an empty 
mortal frame. See, the child of Venus comes, with 
quiver reversed, with bows broken, and lightless 
torch ; look, how pitiable he comes, with drooping 
wings, how he beats his bared breast with hostile 
hand ! His tears are caught by the locks hanging 
scattered about his neck, and from his lips comes 
the sound of shaking sobs. In such plight, they 
say, he was at Aeneas his brother's laying away, 
when he came forth of thy dwelling, fair lulus ; nor 
was Venus' heart less wrought when Tibullus died 
than when the fierce boar crushed the groin of the 
youth she loved. Yes, we bards are called sacred, 
and the care of the gods ; there are those who even 
think we have the god within. 

19 Too true it is, death rudely profaneth every 
sacred thing, and layeth darksome hands on all ! 
Of what avail to Ismarian Orpheus was his sire, of 
what avail his mother ? a Of what that the wild 
beast stopped in amaze, o'ermastered by his song? 
The same sire, 'tis said, mourned Linus, too, singing 
"aelinon ! " in the deep wood to unresponsive lyre. 
Add to these Maeonia's child, from whom as from 
fount perennial the lips of bards are bedewed with 
Pierian waters — him, too, a final day submerged in 
black Avernus. 'Tis song alone escapes the greedy 
pyre. The work of bards — the renown of the toils 
of Troy, and the tardy web unwoven with nightly 
wile — endures for aye. So Nemesis, so Delia, will 
long be known to fame, the one a recent passion, 
the other his first love. 

33 What boot your sacrifices ? What now avail 
the sistrums of Egypt ? a What your repose apart in 
faithful beds ? When evil fate sweeps away the 
good — forgive me who say it ! — I am tempted to 
think there are no gods. Live the duteous life — 
you will die ; be faithful in your worship — in the 
very act of worship heavy death will drag you from 
the temple to the hollow tomb ; put your trust in 
beautiful song — behold, Tibullus lies dead : from 
his whole self there scarce remains what the slight 
urn receives ! Is it really thee, thou consecrated 
bard, whom the flames of the pyre have seized, 
and is it thy breast they have not feared to feed 
upon ? Flames that shrank not from such awful 
wrong could have burned the golden temples of the 
blessed gods ! She turned her face away who holds 
the heights of Eryx ; some, too, there are who say 
she kept not back the tear. 

47 And yet, 'tis better so than if Phaeacian land
had laid mean soil o'er thy nameless corse. To 
this 'tis due that at least thy mother closed thy 
swimming eyes as thou didst pass from life, and 
bestowed on thy ashes the final boon ; to this 'tis due 
that thy sister came, with hair disordered and torn, 
to share the poor mother's grief, and Nemesis, and 
her thou lovedst before, added their kisses to those 
from thine own kin, and left not desolate thy pyre. 
" More happily," spake Delia, descending from the 
pyre, " was I beloved by thee ; thou wert living as 
long as I kindled thee." To whom Nemesis, " Why," 
said she, " do you mourn for a loss which is mine ? 
'Twas I to whom he clung when his hand failed 
in death." 

59 Yet, if aught survives from us beyond mere 
name and shade, in the vale of Elysium Tibullus will 
abide. Mayst thou come to meet him, thy youthful 
temples encircled with the ivy, and thy Calvus with 
thee, learned Catullus ; thou too, if the charge be 
false thou didst wrong thy friend, O Gallus lavish of 
thy blood and of thy soul. To these is thy shade 
comrade ; if shade there be that survives the body, 
thou hast increased the number of the blest,
refined Tibullus. O bones, rest quiet in protecting 
urn, I pray, and may the earth weigh light upon 
thine ashes ! 


X 

The time for Ceres' yearly festival is come ; my 
love isin retreat, and rests alone/' O golden Ceres, 
thy delicate tresses crowned with ears of wheat, why 
dost thou with thy festival put ban upon our joys ? 

5 Thee, goddess, do people everywhere call giver 
of gifts, nor is there goddess less envies men their 
blessings. Before thee, neither did shaggy countryman
parch the corn, nor known upon the earth 
was the name of threshing-floor, but the oak, first 
of our oracles brought forth the acorn ; this, and 
the herb that sprang - from the tender turf, were his 
food. 'Twas Ceres first taught the seed to swell 
in the fields, and cut with sickle the coloured locks 
of the corn ; 'twas she first made the steer bend 
neck to the yoke, and turned with the share's curved 
tooth the ancient mould. 

15 Does any think this a goddess to joy in the 
tears of lovers, and to see fit worship in the torments 
of lying apart ? However much she loves her fruitful 
fields, she is yet no simple rustic, nor has heart void 
of love. The Cretans will be my witness — and the 
Cretans are not wholly false. 6 Crete is the land 
proud of the nurture of Jove. 'Twas there that he 
who sways the starry heights of the world drank 
in the milk with the tender mouth of a little child. 

23 We have great faith in their witness — witness 
approved by their foster-son. Ceres herself, I think, 
will own to my impeachment. Under Cretan Ida 
the goddess had seen Iasius with sure hand piercing 
the wild beast's side. She looked on him, and when 
her tender heart had caught the fire, she was victim 
now of shame, and now again of love. Her shame 
was overcome by love ; you might see the furrows 
of the field grown dry and the sown grain returning
with scantest part of itself. When the well- 
wielded mattock had wrought upon the acre, and 
the hooked share had broken the dour glebe, and 
the seed had gone forth* equal over the broad 
plowed fields, the deluded husbandman had vowed 
in vain. The goddess potent over increase dallied 
in the deep woods; fallen from her long tresses 
were the woven spikes of corn. Crete only was 
fruitful with fecund year ; wherever the goddess 
had bent her step, all was rich with the garner ; 
Ida, the very home of forests, was white with 
harvest, and the wild boar reaped the grain in the 
woodland. Minos, giver of laws, wished for seasons 
ever like this, wished that Ceres' love might long 
endure. 

43 Because lying apart was sad for thee, O golden 
Goddess, must I now suffer thus on thy holy day ? 
Why must I be sad, when for thee thy daughter 
is found, and reigns o'er realms of lesser state than 
only Juno's ? A festal day calls for love, and songs, 
and wine ; these are the gifts that are fitly tendered 
the gods our masters. 


XI (A)

Much have I endured, and for long time ; my 
wrongs have overcome my patience ; withdraw from 
my tired-out breast, base love ! Surely, now I 
have claimed my freedom, and fled my fetters, 
ashamed of having borne what I felt no shame while 
bearing. Victory is mine, and I tread under foot my 
conquered love ; courage has entered my heart, 
though late. Persist, and endui'e ! this smart will 
some day bring thee good ; oft has bitter potion 
brought help to the languishing. 

Can it be I have endured it — to be so oft 
repulsed from your doors, and to lay my body down, 
a free born man, on the hard ground ? Can it be 
that, for some no one you held in your embrace, 
I have lain, like a slave keeping vigil, before your 
tight-closed home ? I have seen when the lover 
came forth from your doors fatigued, with frame 
exhausted and weak from love's campaign ; yet this 
is a slighter thing than being seen by him — may 
shame like that befall my enemies ! 

17 When have I not in patience clung close to your 
side, myself your guard, myself your lover, myself 
your companion ? Be sure, too, that people liked 
you because you were at my side ; my love for you 
has won you love from many. Why repeat the 
shameful lies of your empty tongue, and recall the 
perjured oaths to the gods you have sworn to my 
undoing ? Why tell of the silent nods of young 
lovers at the banquet board, and of words concealed 
in the signal agreed upon ? Say I had been told she 
was ill — headlong and madly I ran to her ; I came, 
and she was not ill — to my rival ! 

27 Oft bearing such-like things, and others I say 
naught of, I have hardened ; seek another in my 
stead who can submit to them. Already my craft 
is decked with votive wreath, and listens undisturbed 
to the sea's swelling waters. Cease wasting your 
caresses, and the words that once had weight - I am 
not a fool, as once I was ! 


XI (B)

Struggling over my fickle heart, love draws it now 
this way, and now hate that — but love, I think, is 
winning. I will hate, if I have strength ; if not, 
I shall love unwilling. The ox, too, loves not the 
yoke ; what he hates he none the less bears. I fly 
from your baseness — as I fly, your beauty draws me 
back ; I shun the wickedness of your ways — your 
person I love. Thus I can live neither with you 
nor without, and seem not to know my own heart's 
prayer. I would you were either less beauteous or 
less base ; beauty so fair mates not with evil ways. 
Your actions merit hate, your face pleads winningly 
for love — ah ! wretched me, it has more power than 
its owner's misdeeds. 

45 Spare me, O by the laws of love's comradeship, 
by all the gods who oft lend themselves for you to 
deceive, and by that face of yours, to me the image 
of high divinity, and by your eyes, that have taken 
captive mine ! Whatever you be, mine ever will 
you be ; choose you only whether you wish me also 
willing, or to love because constrained ! Let me 
rather spread my sails and use the favouring breeze, 
that I may wish, though against my will, for love's 
constraint. 


XII 

What day was that, ye birds not white, on which 
you chanted omens ill-boding to the poet ever in 
love ? or what ill star shall I think is rising on my 
fate, or what gods shall I complain are moving war 
against me ? She who but now was called my own, 
whom I began alone to love, must now, I fear, be 
shared with many. 

7 Am I mistaken, or is it my books of verse 
have made her known ? So will it prove — 'tis my 
genius has made her common. And I deserve it ! 
for why was I the crier of her beauty ? Through 
my fault she I love has become a thing of sale. I 
am the pander has helped her to please, I have been 
guide to lead the lover, by my hand has her door 
been opened. 

13 Whether verses are good for aught, I doubt ; 
they have always been my bane, and stood in the 
light of my good. Though there was Thebes, though 
Troy, though Caesar's deeds, Corinna only has stirred 
my genius. Would that the Muses had looked away 
when I first touched verse, and Phoebus refused me 
aid when my attempt was new ! 

19 And yet 'tis not the custom to heed the poet's 
witness ; my verses, too, I had preferred should 
have no weight. 'Twas we poets made Scylla steal 
from her sire a his treasured locks, and hide in her 
groin the devouring dogs ; 'tis we have placed wings 
on feet, and mingled snakes with hair ; our song 
made Abas' child a victor with the winged horse. 6 
We, too, stretched Tityos out through a mighty 
space, and gave to the viperous dog three mouths; 
we made Enceladus, hurling the spear with a thousand 
arms, and the heroes snared by the voice of the 
doubtful maid. We shut in the skins of the Ithacan 
the East-winds of Aeolus ; made the traitor Tantalus 
thirst in the midst of the stream. Of Niobe we made 
a rock, and turned a maiden to a bear. 'Tis due to 
us that the bird of Cecrops sings Odrysian Itys ; 
that Jove transforms himself now to a bird, and now 
to gold, or cleaves the waters a bull with a maiden 
on his back. Why tell of Proteus, and those Theban 
seeds, the dragon's teeth ; that cattle once there 
were that spewed forth flames from their mouths ; 
of thy sisters, Auriga, weeping tears of amber o'er 
their cheeks rt ; of what were ships, but now are 
goddesses of the sea ; of the ill-starred day at 
Atreus' maddened tables, and the rocks that followed 
at stroke of the lyre ? 

41 Measureless pours forth the creative wantonness 
of bards, nor trammels its utterance with history's 
truth. My praising of my lady, too, you should have 
taken for false ; now your easy trust is my undoing. 


XIII 

Since she I wed was sprung from the fruit-bearing 
Faliscan town, it chanced we came to the walls 
brought low, Camillus, by thee. The priestesses were 
making ready chaste festival to Juno, with solemn 
games and a cow of native stock ; 'twas well worth 
while to tarry and learn the rites, though the way 
thither is a toilsome road with steep ascents. 

7 There stands an ancient sacred grove, all dark 
with shadows from dense trees ; behold it — you would 
agree a deity indwelt the place. An altar receives 
the prayers and votive incense of the faithful — an 
artless altar, upbuilt by hands of old. From here, 
when the pipe has sounded forth in solemn strain, 
advances over carpeted ways the annual pomp ; snowy 
heifers are led along mid the plaudits of the crowd, 
heifers reared in their native meadows of Faliscan 
grass, and calves that threaten with brow not yet to 
be feared, and, lesser victim, a pig from the lowly sty, 
and the leader of the flock, with hard temples overhung 
by the curving horn. The she-goat only is hateful 
to the mistress-deity ; through her tale-telling, 
they say, the goddess was found in the deep forest 
and made to cease the flight she had entered on." 
Now, even children assail the tattler with their darts, 
and she herself is prize to whoever deals the wound. 

23 Wherever the goddess will pass, youths and 
timid maidens go before, sweeping the broad ways 
with trailing robe. The maidens' locks are pressed 
by gold and gems, and the proud palla covers feet 
that are bright with gold ; in the manner of their 
Grecian sires of yore, veiled in white vestments they 
bear on their heads the sacred otferings of old. The 
crowd keep reverent silence as the golden pomp 
comes on, with the goddess' self close in the wake 
of her ministers. 

31 From Argos is the form of the pomp ; when 
Agamemnon fell, Halaesus left behind both the crime 
and the riches of his fatherland, and after wandering 
an exile over land and sea founded with auspicious 
hand these lofty walls. 'Twas he who taught his 
Faliscans the holy rites of Juno. Ever friendly to 
me, and ever to their folk, may those rites be. 


XIV 

That you should not err, since you are fail", is not 
my plea, but that I be not compelled, poor wretch, 
to know it ; no censor am I who demands that you 
become chaste, but one who asks that you attempt 
to feign. She does not sin who can deny her sin, 
and 'tis only the fault avowed that brings dishonour. 
What madness is this, to confess in the light of day 
the hidden things of night, and spread abroad your 
secret deeds ? Even the jade that receives some 
unknown son of Quirinus is careful first to slip the 
bolt and exclude the crowd ; and you — will you 
expose your faults to the mercy of evil tongues 
and be the informer to tell of your own misdeeds ? 
Put on a better mind, and imitate, at least, the 
modest of your sex, and let me think you honest 
though you are not. What you are doing, continue 
to do ; only deny that you have done, nor be ashamed 
to use modest speech in public. 

17 There is a spot that calls for wantonness ; fill 
that with all delights, and let blushing be far away. 
Once you are forth from there, straight lay all
lewdness aside, and leave your faults in the couch .... 
Put on with your dress a face that shrinks from 
guilt, and let a modest aspect deny the harlot's trade. 
Cheat the people, cheat me ; allow me to mistake 
through ignorance, to enjoy a fool's belief in you ! 

31 Why must I see so often the sending and 
getting of notes ? Why that your couch has been 
pressed in every place ? Why do I gaze on hair 
disordered by more than sleep, and see the mark 
of a tooth upon your neck? You all but bring 
your sin before my very eyes ; if you hesitate to 
spare your name, at least spare me ! My mind fails 
me and I suffer death each time you confess your 
sin, and through my frame the blood runs cold. 
Then do I love you, then try in vain to hate what 
I love perforce ; then would I gladly be dead — but 
dead with you ! 

41 I will make no inquiry, be assured, and will 
not follow out what you will make ready to hide ; 
to be deceived shall be as a duty. If none the less 
I shall find you out in the midst of a fault, and my 
eyes perforce shall have looked upon your shame, 
see you deny that I clearly saw what was clearly 
seen — my eyes will yield to your words. 'Twill 
be an easy palm for you — to be victor over one who 
is eager to be vanquished ; all that you need is a 
tongue that remembers "I did not do it ! " When 
you may win the day by a mere two words, if you 
cannot through your cause, be victor through your 
judge ! 


XV 

Seek a new bard, mother of tender Loves ! I am 
come to the last turning-post my elegies will graze ; 
the elegies whose poet am I — nor have these my 
delights dishonoured me — child reared on Paelignian 
acres, and heir, if that be aught, of a line of
grandsires far removed, no knight created but now amid 
the whirlwind of war. 

7 Mantua joys in Virgil, Verona in Catullus ; 'tis I 
shall be called the glory of the Paelignians, race 
whom their love of freedom compelled to honourable
arms when anxious Rome was in fear of the 
allied bands ; a and some stranger, looking on 
watery Sulmo's walls, that guard the scant acres 
of her plain, may say : " O thou who couldst beget 
so great a poet, however small thou art, I name 
thee mighty ! " 

15 O worshipful child, and thou of Amathus, 
mother of the worshipful child, pluck ye up from 
my field your golden standards ! The horned Lyaean 
hath dealt me a sounding blow with weightier 
thyrsus ; I must smite the earth with mighty steeds 
on a mightier course. Unwarlike elegies, congenial 
Muse, O fare ye well, work to live on when I am 
no more ! 