I 

This, too, is the work of my pen — mine, Naso's, 
born among the humid Paeligni, the well-known 
singer of my own worthless ways. This, too, have I 
wrought at the bidding of Love — away from me, far 
away, ye austere fair ! Ye are no fit audience for 
my tender strains. For my readers I want the maid 
not cold at the sight of her promised lover's face, 
and the untaught boy touched by passion till now 
unknown ; and let some youth who is wounded by 
the same bow as I am now, know in my lines the 
record of his own heart's flame, and, long wondering, 
say : " From what tatler has this poet learned, that 
he has put in verse my own mishaps ? " 

11 I had dared, I remember, to sing — nor was my 
utterance too weak — of the wars of Heaven, and 
Gyas of the hundred hands, when Earth made her ill 
attempt at vengeance, and steep Ossa, with shelving 
Pelion on its back, was piled upon Olympus. I had 
in hand the thunder-clouds, and Jove with the
lightning he was to hurl to save his own heaven. 

17 My beloved closed her door ! I — let fall Jove 
with his lightning ; Jove's very self dropped from my 
thoughts. Jove, pardon me ! Thy bolts could not 
serve me ; that door she closed was a thunderbolt 
greater than thine. I have taken again to my proper 
arms — the light and bantering elegy ; its gentle 
words have softened the hard-hearted door. Song 
brings down the horns of the blood-red moon, and 
calls back the snowy steeds of the departing sun ; 
song bursts the serpent's jaws apart and robs him of 
his fangs, and sends the waters rushing back upon 
their source. Song has made doors give way, and 
the bolt inserted in the post, although of oak, has 
been made to yield by song. 

29 Of what avail will it be to me to have sung of 
swift Achilles ? What will the sons of Atreus, 
the one or the other, do for me, and he who in 
wandering lost as many years as in war, and Hector 
the lamented, dragged by Haemonian steeds ? But 
a tender beloved, at my oft praising of her beauty 
has come of herself to the poet as the reward for his 
song. Great is my recompense ! Renowned names 
of heroes, fare ye well ; your favours are not the kind 
for me ! And fair ones, turn hither your beauteous 
faces as I sing the songs which rosy Love dictates 
to me ! 


II 

You whose trust is the guarding of your mistress, 
attend, Bagoas, while I say a few words, but apt. 
Yesterday I saw the fair one walking in the portico — 
the one that has the train of Danaus." Forthwith — 
for I was smitten — I sent and asked her favours in 
a note. She wrote back with trembling hand : " It 
is not possible ! " and when I asked why "it was not 
possible," gave this reason, that your guard of your 
mistress was too strict. 

9 If you are wise, good guardian, cease, believe me, 
to merit hate ; whom each man fears, he longs to see 
destroyed. Her husband, too, is anything but wise ; 
for why take pains to watch over that from which, 
even did you not guard, nothing would be lost ? 
But let him, mad fool, do as his passion prompts him, 
and let him think she can be chaste who takes the 
eye of many ; be you the means of giving her stolen 
liberty, that she may render back to you the freedom 
you gave to her. Be willing to conspire with her — the 
mistress is bound to the slave ; fear you to conspire — 
you can pretend. She will read a missive by hei - self 
— think that her mother sent it ! One comes not 
known to you — in a moment you will know him 
well ! She will go to a sick friend, who will not be 
ill — let her go to see her ; let the friend be ill in 
your judgment ! Is she late in coming back, you 
need not let long waiting tire you out, but may lay 
your head in your lap and snore. And make it not 
your business to ask into what happens at linen-clad 
Isis' temple, nor concern yourself about the curving 
theatre ! The accomplice in a secret will reap
continual reward — and what is less labour, too, than 
keeping silence ? He is one favoured, and rules in 
the house, and feels no blows ; he is one with power 
— the rest, a mean crowd, are at his feet. For the 
husband empty reasons are fashioned to keep the 
true ones hid ; and both master and mistress approve 
what the mistress alone approves. After her lord 
has put on a scowling face and bent his brows, he 
does what the wheedling wife has willed shall be 
done. 

35 But let her sometimes none the less cross words 
with you, too, and feign to weep, and call you 
executioner. You, in turn, will charge her with what 
she can safely explain away ; by false accusation take 
away faith in the true. In this way will your honour 
ever increase, in this way your pile of savings grow 
high. Do this, in short time you will be free. 

41 Do you note that tellers of tales wear chains tied 
round their necks ? The squalid dungeon is the 
home of hearts barren of faith. Tantalus seeks for 
water in the midst of waters and catches at ever 
escaping fruits — that was the fate he got for his 
garrulous tongue. Juno's watchman, guarding lo 
too intently, falls before his time ; she — becomes a 
goddess ! I have seen in shackles the livid legs of 
a man who had forced a husband to know himself a 
cuckold. The punishment was less than he deserved. 
His evil tongue brought harm to two ; the husband 
suffered grief, the wife the loss of her good 
name. Believe me, accusations are welcome to no 
husband, nor do they please him, even though he 
hear. If he is cool, you bring your traitorous tales 
to careless ears ; if he loves, your service only makes 
him wretched. 

55 Nor is a fault, however manifest, an easy thing to 
prove ; the wife comes off unharmed, safe in the favour 
of her judge. Though he himself have seen, he will 
yet believe when she denies, accuse his own eyes, 
and give himself the lie. Let him but look on his 
lady's tears, and he himself, too, will begin to wail, 
and say : " The gabbler that slandered you shall pay 
for it ! " Why enter on a contest with odds against 
you ? You will lose and get a flogging in the end, 
while she will look on from the lap of her judge 

63 'Tis no crime we are entering on ; we are not 
coming together to mingle poisons ; no drawn sword 
flashes in our hands. What we ask is that you will 
give us the means to love in safety. What can be 
more modest than our prayers ? 


III

Miserable me, that you who guard your mistress 
are neither man nor woman, and cannot know the 
joys of mutual love ! He who first robbed boys of 
their nature should himself have suffered the wounds 
he made. Readily would you be compliant and 
yielding to lovers' prayers, if you had ever grown 
warm with love for any woman. You were not born 
for a horse, nor for the strenuous service of arms ; 
the warlike spear fits not your right hand. Let men 
engage in those ways of life ; do you lay aside all 
manly hopes. The standards you bear must be 
of your mistress's service. She is the one for you to 
ply with deserving deeds ; hers is the favour to bring 
you gain ; should you lack her, what then will be 
your use ? 

13 Then, too, she has charms, and her years are 
apt for love's delights ; 'tis a shame for her beauty 
to perish by dull neglect. She could have eluded 
you, strict guardian though you are called ; what 
two have willed lacks not accomplishment. Yet 
since 'twill be better to have tried entreaty, we 
ask your aid, while you still have power to place 
your favours well. 


IV 

I would not venture to defend my faulty morals 
or to take up the armour of lies to shield my 
failings. I confess — if owning my short-comings 
aught avails ; and now, having owned them, I madly 
assail my sins. I hate what I am, and yet, for all 
my desiring, I cannot but be what I hate ; ah, how 
hard to bear the burden you long to lay aside ! 

7 For I lack the strength and will to rule 
myself ; I am swept along like a ship tossed 
on the rushing flood. 'Tis no fixed beauty that 
calls my passion forth — there are a hundred causes 
to keep me always in love. Whether 'tis some fair 
one with modest eyes downcast upon her lap, I am 
aflame, and that innocence is my ensnaring ; whether 
'tis some saucy jade, I am smitten because she is 
not rustic simple, and gives me hope of enjoying 
her supple embrace on the soft couch. If she seem 
austere, and affects the rigid Sabine dame, I judge 
she would yield, but is deep in her deceit. If you 
are taught in books, you win me by your dower of 
rare accomplishments ; if crude, you win me by 
your simple ways. Some fair one tells me
Callimachus' songs are rustic beside mine — one who 
likes me I straightway like myself. Another calls 
me no poet, and chides my verses — and I fain would 
clasp the fault-finder to my arms. One treads 
softly — and I fall in love with her step ; another 
is hard — but can be made softer by the touch of love. 
Because this one sings sweetly, with easiest
modulation of the voice, I would snatch kisses as she 
sings ; this other runs with nimble finger over 
the querulous string — who could but fall in love 
with such cunning hands ? Another takes me by 
her movement, swaying her arms in rhythm and 
curving her tender side with supple art — to say 
naught of myself, who take fire from every cause, 
put Hippolytus in my place, and he will be 
Priapus ! a You, because you are so tall, are not 
second to the ancient daughters of heroes, and can 
lie the whole couch's length. Another I find apt
because she is short. I am undone by both ; tall and 
short are after the wish of my heart. She is not well 
dressed — I dream what dress would add ; she is well 
arrayed — she herself shows off her dower of charms. 
A fair white skin will make prey of me, I am prey 
to the golden-haired, and even a love of dusky 
hue will please. Do dark locks hang on a neck 
of snow — Leda was fair to look upon for her black 
locks ; are they of golden hue — Aurora pleased 
with saffron locks. To all the old tales my 
love can fit itself. Fresh youth steals away my 
heart, I am smitten with later years ; the one has 
more worth, the other wins me with charm of 
person. 

47 In fine, whatever fair ones anyone could praise 
in all the city — my love is candidate for the favours 
of them all.


V 

No love is worth so much — away, Cupid with the 
quiver ! — that so often my most earnest prayer should 
be for death. For death my prayers are, whenever 
I think you false to me — ah, girl born for my 
everlasting ill ! 

5 No intercepted note it is that lays bare to me 
your deeds, nor the secret giving of gifts that
accuses you. Oh, would that my charge were such 
that I could not win ! Wretched me ! why is my 
cause so strong ? Happy he who dares boldly
defend his beloved, to whom his mistress can say, " I 
did not do it ! " Iron of heart is he, and too much 
favours his own pain, who would win a bloodstained 
triumph by the downfall of the guilty. 

13 I saw your guilty acts my wretched self with 
sober eye, when the wine had been placed and you 
thought I slept. I saw you both say many things 
with quiverings of the brow ; in your nods was much 
of speech. Your eyes, too, girl, were not dumb, 
and the table was written o'er with wine, nor did 
any letter fail your fingers. Your speech, too, I 
recognized was busied with hidden message, and 
your words charged to stand for certain meanings. 
And now the throng of guests had already left the 
board and gone ; there were left a youth or two, 
asleep in wine. 'Twas then indeed I saw you 
sharing shameful kisses — it is clear to me they 
were kisses of the tongue — not such as sister bestows 
on austere brother, but such as yielding sweetheart 
gives her eager lover ; not such as one could think 
Diana grants to Phoebus, but such as Venus oft 
bestowed on Mars. 

29 a What are you doing ? " I cry out. " Where 
now are you scattering joys that are mine ? I will 
lay my sovereign hands upon my rights. Those 
kisses are common to you with me, and common 
to me with you — why does any third attempt to 
share those goods ? " 

33 These were my words, and whatever passion 
dictated to my tongue ; but she — her conscious face 
mantled with ruddy shame, like the sky grown red 
with the tint of Tithonus' bride, or maid gazed on 
by her newly betrothed ; like roses gleaming among 
the lilies where they mingle, or the moon in labour 
with enchanted steeds, or Assyrian ivory Maeonia's 
daughter tinctures to keep long years from yellowing 
it. Like one of these, or very like, was the colour 
she displayed, and never was she fairer to look upon. 
She kept her eyes on the ground — to keep them 
on the ground was becoming ; there was grief in her 
face — grief made her comely. Just as it was, and 
it was neatly dressed, I was moved to tear her 
hair and to fly at her tender cheeks — 

47 When I looked on her face, my brave arms 
dropped ; my love was protected by armour of her own. 
But a moment before in a cruel rage, I was humble 
now, and e'en entreated her to give me kisses not 
less sweet than those. She smiled, and gave me her 
best with all her heart — kisses that could make irate 
Jove let drop from his hand the three-forked bolt ; 
I am in wretched torment for fear my rival has tasted 
them as sweet, and I would not have his kisses of 
the same seal. Much better, too, were these than I 
had taught, and something new she seemed to have 
learned. Their too much pleasing was an ill sign, 
for her kiss was voluptuous. Yet this one thing is 
not all my grief — I complain not merely that her 
kisses are close, and yet that they are close I do 
complain ; those kisses could have been no wise but 
lewdly taught. Some master has had a great reward 
for his teaching. 


VI 

Our parrot, winged mimic from Indian land of 
dawn, is no more — come flocking, ye birds, to his 
obsequies ! Come, all ye feathered faithful, come 
beat your breasts with the wing, and mark your 
tender cheeks with the rigid claw ; let your ruffled 
plumage be rent in place of mourning hair, and in 
place of the long trumpet let your songs sound out ! 
If you, Philomela, are lamenting the deed of the 
tyrant of Ismarus, a that lament has been fulfilled bv 
its term of years ; turn aside to the hapless funeral 
of no common bird — great cause for grief is Itys, 
but belongs to the ancient past. 

11 All ye who poise your flight in liquid air, O 
grieve — yet thou before all others, friendly turtle- 
dove ! The life that you two shared was filled with 
all harmony ; your loyalty was long and firm, and 
stood fast to the end. What the youth of Phocis 
was to Argive Orestes, this was the turtle-dove to 
you, O parrot, so long as fate allowed. 

17 And yet, of what avail that loyalty, of what 
your rare and beauteous colour, of what that voice 
adept in mimicry of sounds, of what my darling's 
favour as soon as you were hers ? — ah, hapless one, 
glory of birds, you surely are no more ! You could 
dim with your wings the fragile jasper, and your 
beak was Punic-red with ruddy saffron tinge. On 
earth there was no bird could better imitate speech 
— you rendered words so well in your throaty tone ! 

25 'Twas envious fate swept you away — vou were 
no mover of battles fierce ; you were a prattling 
lover of placid peace. Look! quails are ever battling 
with their kind ; and perhaps 'tis the cause of their 
often living to old-wives' age. You were sated with 
very little ; speech you loved so well that your beak 
had no time for many foods. A nut was your fare, 
and poppy-seeds brought you sleep, and drops of 
unmixed water drove away your thirst. The greedy 
vulture lives on, and the kite that traces circles 
through the air, and the daw, the harbinger of rain ; 
the raven, too, hated by armour-bearing Minerva, 
lives on — it, at least, will hardly die after nine 
generations ; the parrot, that loquacious image of 
the human voice, gift brought from the limit of the 
world, is no more ! Best things are all too oft first 
swept away by the greedy hands of fate ; the worse 
are suffered to fill out their tale of years. Thersites 
looked upon the sad funeral of him of Phylaee, and 
Hector was ashes while yet his brothers lived. 

43 Why call to mind the pious vows of my love in 
her fear for you — vows swept to sea by the gusty 
South ? The seventh dawn came, that was not to 
bring another in its train, and Fate stood over you 
with distaff empty now. Yet the words were not 
silenced on your nerveless palate ; your dying tongue 
cried out : " Corinna, fare you well ! " 

49 At the foot of a hill in Elysium is a leafy grove 
of dark ilex, and the moist earth is green with never- 
fading grass. If we may have faith in doubtful 
things, that place, we are told, is the abode of the 
pious winged kind, and from it impure fowl are kept 
away. There far and wide feed the harmless swans 
and the long-lived phoenix, bird ever alone of its 
kind ; there the bird of Juno spreads for her own 
eye her plumage, and the winsome dove gives kisses 
to her eager mate. Our parrot, welcomed among 
them to this woodland seat, attracts to himself by 
his words the feathered faithful. 

59 His bones are covered by a mound — mound such 
as fits his body's size — on which a scant stone bears 
a legend that just fits the space : — 

" YOU MAY JUDGE FROM MY VERY MONUMENT MY 
MISTRESS LOVED ME WELL. 
I HAD A MOUTH WAS SKILLED IN SPEECH BEYOND A 
BIRD." 


VII 

Am I then to stand trial on new complaints for 
ever? Grant that I win, I am wearied of fighting 
my case so many times. If I have looked back 
on the highest rows of the marble theatre, you pick 
out one of the many women there as a ground for 
grievance ; or if a fair beauty has looked on me 
with unspeaking face, you charge that in her face 
were unspoken signals. If I have praised some girl, 
poor me ! your fingers make for my hair ; if I pick 
Haws in her, you think I am hiding a crime. If 
my colour is good, you charge me with coolness 
toward you also ; if bad, with dying of love for 
another. 

11 I would I were even conscious of some wrong 
done ! Those who have merited punishment bear 
it with even mind ; but now you accuse me without 
reason, and by lending belief to every groundless 
notion yourself keep your ire from having weight. 
Look at the long-eared, pitiable ass, how slowly he 
moves, broken by never-ending blows ! 

17 And look now, a fresh charge ! Cypassis, the 
deft girl that tires your hair, is east at me, accused 
of wronging her mistress' couch. Ye gods grant me 
better, if I have a mind to sin, than find my pleasure 
in a love of mean and despised lot ! What man that 
is free would willingly mate with a slave, and clasp 
a waist that was cut with the lash ? Add that her 
work is to dress your hair, and she pleases you with 
the ministry of her cunning hand ; of course I would 
tamper with a servant so faithful to you ! With what 
issue, except to be repulsed, and then betrayed ? 
By Venus I swear, and by the bows of her winged 
boy, I am not guilty of the charge you bring ! 


VIII 

Perfect in setting hair aright in a thousand ways, 
but worthy to dress only that of goddesses, Cypassis, 
you whom I have found in our stolen delight not 
wholly simple, apt for your mistress' service, but more 
apt for mine — who is the tattler has told of our 
coming together? Where did Corinna get wind of 
your affair with me ? Can I have blushed? Can I 
have let slip a single word that gave a tell-tale sign 
of our stolen love ? 

9 Well, suppose I did contend that he who could 
lose his heart to a slave was out of his senses ? The 
Thessalian took fire at the charms of the slave Briseis; 
a slave, Phoebas, was loved by the Mycenean chief
I am neither greater than Tantalus' son. nor greater 
than Achilles ; why should I judge base for me what 
was fit for kings ? 

15 Yet. when she fixed her angered eyes on you, I 
saw the blushes completely overspread your cheeks ; 
but how much more contained was I, if you happen 
to remember, when I swore to my faithfulness in 
mighty Venus' name ! Thou, goddess, mayst thou 
bid the warm South-wind sweep o'er the Carpathian 
deep the false oaths of a harmless heart ! 

21 In return for these offices to you, dusky Cypassis, 
pay me to-day the sweet price of your caress ! Why 
do you shake your head and refuse, ungrateful girl, 
and feign fresh fears ? 'Twill suffice to have earned 
tin- favour of only one of your masters. But if you 
stupidly say no, I shall turn informer and confess all 
we have done before ; I shall stand forth the betrayer 
of my own guilt, and tell your mistress where I 
have met you, and how many times, Cypassis, and 
how many ways, and what they were ! 


IX (A)

O Cupid, never enough roused in my behalf, O boy 
lodged in my heart and doing naught for me — why 
dost harm me, the soldier who have never left the 
standards, and why am I wounded in my own camp ? 
Why doth thy torch burn friends, and thy bow 
transfix them ? 'Twere greater glory to vanquish 
them that oppose. 

7 What ? did not the hero of Haemonia afterward 
help with the healer's art him he had smit and 
pierced with the spear?* The huntsman pursues 
the quarry that flies ; what he has taken he leaves 
behind, and ever strains to the prey ahead. We, a 
people who have surrendered to thee, feel the weight 
of thy weapons ; with the foe that resists, thy hand 
is slow to move. Of what avail to blunt thy barbed 
arrows on naked bones ? — for love is leaving my 
bones naked. So many men there are without love, 
without love so many maids ! — there is thy field for 
great and glorious triumph. Rome, had she not 
employed her powers against the boundless world, 
would be filled even now with straw-thatched huts. 
19 The tired-out soldier is let retire to the acres he 
received ; the l'ace-horse free from the course is sent 
to the pastures ; and the long docks receive to cover 
the drawn-up ship of pine, and the harmless foil a is 
claimed when the sword has been laid aside. I, too, 
who have served so oft in the wars of woman's love 
— 'twere time, my labours o'er, I lived in peace. 


IX (B) 

"Lay aside thy loves," should some god say to me,. 
ff and live without them," I would pray him not ask 
it — even so sweet an evil are the fair. When I have 
grown weary of love and the ardour of my heart has 
cooled, my soul is somehow seized upon by a
whirlwind of wretchedness. As a hard-mouthed horse 
bears headlong in flight the master who strives in 
vain to hold him back with foaming bit ; as on a 
sudden, when land is now all but gained and the 
keel is touching the haven, the wind sweeps it out 
to the deep — so am I oft carried away again by the 
veering gale of Cupid, and bright Love takes up 
again the weapons I know well. 

35 Transfix me, child ! I have laid aside my 
defences, and stand unarmed before thee ; here is a 
place for thy powers, here thy right hand may 
strike ; hither, as if bid, thine arrows come now of 
their own accord — they scarcely know their quiver 
because of me ! Unhappy he who can rest the whole 
night through, and calls his slumbers a great boon ! 
Fool ! what else is sleep but the image of chill 
death ? As for repose, the fates will give long time 
for that. For me — let only the words of a decen ing 
sweetheart lure me on; mere hoping, will surely 
bring me great delight. And let her now speak 
winningly, and now still chide ; let me oft enjoy my 
lady-love, oft go repulsed away. 

47 That Mars is inconstant, thou, his step-son 
Cupid, art the cause ; thy step-sire wields doubtful 
arms, and after thy example. Thou art light, more 
quick to feel the wind than thine own wings, and 
dost grant and deny thy joys with a faith that is 
never sure. Yet, none the less, if thou and thy 
beautiful mother will heed my prayer, come, set 
up your thrones in my heart and reign there for 
evermore ! Let the fair, too, be your subjects in 
that realm — a fickle, fickle throng ! thus will you be 
adored by peoples twain. 


X 

Twas you, Graecinus, 'twas surely you, I remember, 
who declared to me that for any man to love 
two maids at once was a thing impossible. To you 
I owe my fall ; to you I owe being caught without 
my arms — lo ! to my shame in love I am with two 
maids at once. Each one is beautiful, both tasteful
in their dress ; in accomplishment, 'tis doubtful 
whether the one or the other is first. The one 
is fairer than the other — and the other is also 
fairer than she ; one pleases me the more — and so 
does the other, too ! Like a yacht that is driven 
by contrary winds, my love is now for the one and 
now for the other ; it veers about, and keeps me 
torn in two. Why, O lady of Eryx, dost thou double 
endlessly my woes ? Was not one love enough to 
keep me anxious ? Why add leaves to the trees, 
stars to a full sky, and heaped-up waters to the deep 
seas? 

15 And yet 'tis better thus than if I were loveless 
and alone — to my enemies fall the austere life ! To 
my enemies fall the lot of sleep in a lonely bed, and 
the laying their limbs loosely in its midst. But for 
me — let cruel love break off my lazy slumbers, and 
may I not be the only burden of my bed ! Let 
my powers be waste by love, and no one say me 
nay — if one suffices, well ; if not, then two ! I shall 
meet the test — slender my limbs, but not without 
strength ; 'tis bulk, not sinew, my body lacks ; and 
delight will feed the vigour of my loins. No fair 
one has ever been deceived in me ; oft have I made 
merry through all the hours of night, and reached 
the morning fit and strong. Happy he whom the 
mutual strife of Love lays low ! Ye gods, let my 
end come from such a cause ! 

31 Let the soldier give his breast to cover with 
hostile darts, and buy eternal glory with his blood. 
Let the grasping trader's quest be wealth, and his 
perjured mouth drink in when he is wrecked the 
billow his ploughing keel has tired. But for me — 
may it be my lot when I die to languish in Venus' 
embrace, and be dissolved in the midst of its delight ; 
and may one, dropping tears at my funeral, say : 
" Thine was a death accorded with thy life ! " 


XI 

'Twas the pine felled on Pelion's top that first 
taught men the evil paths of the sea, while the waves 
looked on in wonder — the craft that rashly sailed 
between the clashing rocks and bore away the wool 
sightly with yellow flock. O that the Argo had 
been o'erwhelmed and drunk the waters of doom, 
so that no one should trouble with oar the far- 
stretching seas ! 

7 Lo ! Corinna flies from the couch that knows 
her, and the Penates she has shared', and makes 
ready to venture forth on treacherous paths. Why, 
ah. wretched me ! — must I fear for you the West- 
wind and the East, and frozen Boreas, and the balmy 
South ? Not yonder will you gaze on towns, not 
upon groves ; there is only the deep-blue form of 
the unjust sea. Nor do the waters in the mid of 
the deep have delicate shells and painted pebbles ; 
for those we linger on the thirsty strand. Print ye 
the strand with marble-white feet, fair maids ; so far 
is safe — the rest of the way is blind. And let others 
tell you tales of battling winds ; of waters that Scylla 
makes dread, or Charybdis ; of rocks where the 
violent Ceraunians tower from the sea ; of the fold 
in the shore where the Syrtes, great and lessor, lie 
in wait. These things let others tell you ; whatever 
each shall say, believe it! Believing brings no harm 
from any storm. 

23 Too late you look back upon the laud, when the 
cable is loosed and the curving keel is rushing out 
to the measureless brine ; when the anxious sailor 
shudders at unfavouring winds, and sees death near, 
as near as he sees the water. But should Triton 
smite and roughen the waves, how your whole face 
would show no trace of colour ! Then would you 
call for aid on the high-born stars, the sons of 
fruitful Leda/' and say : " Happy she her own land 
retains ! " 

31 The safer course was fondly to keep your couch, 
to read your books, to sound with your fingers the 
Thracian lyre. Yet, if the flying gale must bear 
away my empty words, may Galatea none the less be 
kindly to your craft ! 'Twill be your crime if such 
a girl is lost, O daughters divine of Nereus — yours 
and your sire's. As you go, remember me, and 
return with favouring wind ; may the breeze that 
then fills your sails be a stronger one ! Then let 
mighty Nereus make slope the sea toward these our 
shores ; hitherward let blow the winds, hitherward 
the tide roll the waters ! You yourself, pray Zephyr 
strike full your sheets, you yourself stir with your 
baud the swelling sails ! I shall be first to get sight 
of the well-known craft from the shore, and shall 
say: "•That sail bears hither my gods!" And I 
will take you in my arms, and wildly snatch kiss on 
kiss. The victim vowed against your return shall 
fall ; the yielding sands shall be levelled in form 
of a couch, and some mound be reared, of whatever 
sort, to serve for table. 

40 There, when the wine is set, you will tell me 
many a tale — how your ship was all but engulfed in 
the midst of the waters; and how. while hasting 
home to me, you feared neither hours of
unfriendly night nor headlong winds <>t' the south. 
All I shall take for truth, though you invent 
it all — why should I not flatter my own heart's
desires ? May Lucifer, most brilliant in the lofty 
sky, with loose-reined steed full quickly bring that 
hour ! 


XII 

Come lie about my temples, ye laurels of the 
triumph ! Victory is mine ; look, Corinna is in my 
arms, whom her husband, whom her keeper, whom 
the unyielding door— such a troop of enemies ! — all 
guarded in fear she be taken by some wile ! Here 
is a victory deserves a special triumph, for no 
part of the spoil is stained by blood. It is no lowly 
walls, no towns girt round by little moats, that I 
have taken by my generalship — but a girl ! 

9 When Pergamum fell, o'ercome in a war two 
lustrums long, from among so many nun what part 
of the praise fell to Atreus' son? But my glory is 
a thing apart for me, unshared by any soldier ; and 
none other may pretend to my renown. I myself 
have been captain in the march to my prayed-for 
end, I myself the soldiery ; 'tis I have been cavalry. 
'tis I have been infantry, 'tis I have been standard- 
bearer. Nor has fortune mingled chance with my 
achievements — hither come, Triumph won by care 
alone ! 

17 Nor is the cause of my warfare new. Had 
Tyndareus' daughter not been stolen, Europe and 
Asia would have been at peace. 'Twas woman 
turned the sylvan Lapiths and the double-membered 
folk a to unseemly arms o'er wine; 'twas woman 
moved the Trojans a second time to set new wars 
afoot, in thy realms, O just Latinus 6 ; 'twas woman, 
when the city still was young, that sent against the 
Romans their fathers-in-law, and put the cruel 
weapons in their hands. 

25 I have seen bulls contending for the snowy 
mate ; the heifer herself stood by to see, and spurred 
their hearts. Cupid, who orders many, has ordered 
me, too — but me without shedding of blood — to take 
up the standard for his campaigns. 


XIII 

Corinna, rashly seeking to rid her heavy bosom of 
its load, lies languishing in peril of life. Surely for 
trying without my knowledge a course so filled with 
danger she merits my anger; but my anger falls 
before my fear. And yet, either 'twas I that caused 
her trouble — or so I believe ; with me, what might 
be oft is held for truth. 

7 O Isis, thou that lovest Paraetonium and Canopus' 
genial fields, Memphis, and Pharos rich in palms, 
and where swift Nile glides down and from his 
broad bed comes forth to the waters of the sea 
through seven mouths, by thy sistrums I beseech, 
by the face of revered Anubis— SO may loyal Osiris 
ever love thy rites,'' and the sluggish serpent glide 
about thy altar-gifts, and horned Apis be thy 
comrade in the pomp ! — turn hither thy countenance,
and in one spare us both ! For thou wilt 
give life to my lady, and she to me. Oft has 
she sat in ministration to thee on the days fixed for 
thy service, where the Gallic squadron rides near thy 
laurel-trees." 

19 And thou who hast compassion for women in 
their pangs, when their heavy bodies are tense with 
the hidden load, do thou attend in mercy and give 
ear to my prayers, O Ilithyia ! h She is worthy of 
aid from thee — do thou bid her live ! Myself 
in shining robes will offer incense on thy smoking 
altars, myself bring votive gifts and lay them at 
thy feet. I will add the legend : " Naso, for 
Corinna saved!" Do thou but give occasion for 
the legend and the gifts. 

27 And you — if it be right amid such fear still 
to utter warning — see that this battle be the end 
of such strife for vou ! 


XIV 

Of what avail to fair woman to rest free from 
the burdens of war, nor choose with shield in arm 
to march in the fierce array, if, free from peril of 
battle, she suffer wounds from weapons of her own, 
and arm her unforeseeing hands to her own undoing ? 

5 She who first plucked forth the tender life 
deserved to die in the warfare she began. Can it be 
that, to spare your bosom the reproach of lines, you 
would scatter the tragic sands of deadly combat?  
If vicious ways like this had found favour with 
mothers of olden time, the race of mortal men would 
have perished from the earth, and someone must 
have been found to east abroad a second time in 
the vacant world the stones that were the first 
beginnings of our kind." Who would have crushed 
the might of Priam if divine Thetis of the waves 
had refused to bear the burden hers by due ? Had 
Ilia slain the twins in her swelling bosom, 'twould 
have been doom to the founder of the City that rules 
the earth ; had Venus laid rash hand to Aeneas 
in her heavy womb, the world to come would have 
been orphaned of its Caesars. You, too, though 
you were to be born fair, would have perished had 
your mother tried what you have tried ; and I myself, 
though a death through love was to be my better 
fate, would never have seen the day had my mother 
slain me. 

28 Why cheat the full vine of the growing cluster, 
and pluck with ruthless hand the fruit yet in the 
green ? What is ripe will fall of its self — let grow 
what has once become quick ; a life is no slight 
reward for a short delay. Ah, women, why will you 
thrust and pierce with the instrument, and give 
dire poisons to your children yet unborn ': Tin- maid 
of Colchis stained with tin- blood of her children, we 
condemn, and lament the murder of Itys by the 
mother who brought him forth : but each was a 
cruel parent, each had tragic reasons for avenging 
herself on the husband by shedding blood that she 
shared with him. Tell me, what Tereus provokes 
you on, what Jason, to pierce your bodies with 
aggrieved hand? This neither tin tigress has done 
in jungles of Armenia, nor has lioness had the heart 
to destroy her unborn young; yet tender woman 
does it — but not unpunished ; oft she who slays her 
own in her bosom dies herself. She dies herself, and 
is borne to the pyre with hair unloosed, and all who 
behold cry out : " 'Tis her desert ! " 

41 But may the words I am saying to you be 
carried away on the winds of heaven, and may my 
ominous speech have no ill end ! Ye gods of mercy, 
grant she has sinned this once in safety, 'tis all I ask ; 
for a second fault, let her bear her punishment .' 


XV 

O ring, that art to circle the finger of my fair lady, 
in which naught is of value but the giver's love, 
mayst thou go to her a welcome gift ! May she 
receive thee with glad heart and straightway slip 
thee on her finger ; mayst thou fit her as well as 
she fits me, and press her finger with aptly adjusted 
circle ! 

7 Happy ring, thou wilt be touched by the hands 
of my lady-love ; already, ah me, I envy my own 
gift. Ah, might I suddenly become that gift, by 
the arts of her of Aeaea, or of the ancient one of 
Carpathus ! a Then would I wish you, my lady, both 
to touch your breasts, and lay your left hand within 
your tunic — I would slip from your finger, however 
tight and close ; I would grow loose with wondrous 
art and fall into your bosom. Likewise, to help her 
seal her secret missives, and to keep the dry, clinging 
gem from drawing away the wax. I should first touch 
the moist lips of my beautiful love — only so that I 
scaled no missive that would bring me pain. If you 
wish me given over to the casket's keeping, I will 
refuse to leave your finger, and lessen my circle to 
keep firm hold. I would not ill become you, my 
life, nor be a burden your tender finger would 
refuse to bear. Wear me when you spray yourself 
with the warm rain of the bath, nor shrink at the 
harm from water creeping beneath the gem — but 
methinks my passions would rise at sight of your 
fairness, and I, though naught but that ring, would 
play the human part. 

27 Why pray for what cannot be? Little gift, go 
on thy way; let my lady feel that with thee my 
true love comes ! 


XVI 

Sulmo holds me now. third part of the Paelignian 
fields — a land that is small, but wholesome with 
channelled streams. Though the sun draw nigh and 
crack tin- earth with heat, and the wanton star of the 
Iearian dog blaze forth, the acres of the Paeligni are 
wandered through by the liquid wave, and green iii 
the tender soil rises the fruitful plant. "Rs a land 
rich in corn, and richer still in the grape ; here and 
there its fields bring forth, too, the berry-bearing tree 
of Pallas ; and over the mead whose herbage ever 
springs again along the gliding streams, the grassy 
turf hides thickly tin- moistened ground. 

11 But my heart's flame is not here. I was wrong 
in one word! she who (ires my heart is afar: the 
fire is here. No, could I be set between Pollux 
and Castor, with vou not by, I would not wish a share 
in heaven. May they lit* restless, weighed down 
by ungracious clay, who have cut long roads upon 
the earth ! — else they should have ordered maids to 
go as comrades to young men, if long roads must 
needs be cut upon the earth ! Then if, shivering, 
I were setting foot on the windy Alps, so only my 
lady-love were with me, my journey were made with 
ease. Were my lady-love with me, I should dare to 
steer my ship through the Libyan Syrtes, and spread 
my sails to be driven by the unpropitious South. 
I should feel no fear of the monsters that bay from 
the maiden's groin, nor shrink at thy winding gulfs, 
O curving Malea ; nor the waters which Charybdis, 
sated with sunken ships, pours forth, and, poured 
forth, catches back in her jaws again, 

27 But if the windy power of Neptune holdeth sway, 
and the wave shall sweep away the gods that 
should aid us, rt O place your snowy arms about my 
neck ; I shall bear the sweet burden along with 
easy stroke. Full oft the young lover had swum across 
the waters to see his Hero ; the last time, too, he 
would have swum across, but the way was blind. 6 

33 But here without you, though round about me 
are fields of vines with their busy life, though the 
countryside is saturate with running streams, and 
the rustic summons to the rivulets the flowing wave, 
and the cool breeze caresses the branches of the 
trees, I seem to dwell not in the healthful Paelignian 
land, nor in my natal place, my father's acres — but 
in Scythia, and among the fierce Cilicians, and the 
woaded Britons, and the rocks ruddy with Promethean 
gore.'" 

41 The elm loves the vine-, the vine abandons not 
the elm ; why am I oft separated from the mistress 
of my heart ? Yet you had sworn that you would 
ever be comrade of mine — by me and by your eyes, 
those stars of mine ! The words of women, lighter 
than falling leaves, go all for naught, swept away by 
the whim of wind and wave. 

47 Yet, if still in your heart is some feeling of 
faith toward me who am left alone, begin to make 
good your promises by deeds, and as soon as you 
may, with your own hand shake the rein above the 
flying manes of the ponies that whirl your light 
ear along. And O, wherever she passes, sink down, 
ye hills, and be easy in the winding vales, ye ways ! 


XVII 

If there be one who thinks it base to be a slave 
to woman, before his judgment seat shall I be proved 
guilty of being base ! Yet let me lose my name, so 
she consume me with milder fires who is queen of 
Paphos and wave-beaten Cythera. Ah, would I had 
fallen prey to a merciful mistress, too, since I must 
fall prey to a beauteous one ! Beauty breeds
arrogance. 'Tis Corinna's fair face makes her hard with 
me O wretched me ! why does she know herself 
so well ? Surely, 'tis from her image in the glass 
she gets her haughtiness and she never sees her 
image before her toilet is made ! 

11 Not even if your charms do give you pride and 
promise of empire — () charms born to captivate my 
eyes ! — should vou therefore scorn me when
compared with yourself; lesser things may be fitted to 
the great. We are told that even the nymph Calypso 
was smit with love for a mortal, and kept him for 
her mate against his will." 'Tis believed that Nereus" 
sea-born daughter was wed to the Phthian king, 6 and 
Egeria to Numa skilled in law ; that Vulcan was wed 
by Venus, though when he leaves the forge he limps 
with wretched sidelong gait. This very kind of 
verse is unequal ; and yet the heroic line is fitly 
joined to the shorter. Do you, too, C) light of mine, 
take me — on whatever terms you please ; let it suit 
you dictate law to me as if in the midst of the forum. 
25 I shall not cause you to complain, nor will you 
be glad to see me go ; this will be no love we shall 
need to disavow. Felicitous song, instead of great 
possession, is mine, and many a fair one wishes for 
glory through me ; I know one who bruits it about 
she is Corinna. To have it so, what would she not 
have given ? But neither do the cold Eurotas and 
poplar-fringed Po, far-separated, glide between the 
same banks, nor shall any but you be sung in my little 
books ; the spur to my genius you alone shall be. 


XVIII 

While you, Macer, are bringing your poem to the 
time of Achilles' wrath and clothing the conspiring 
chiefs with the war's first arms, I dally in the 
slothful shade of Venus, and tender Love is bringing 
to naught the lofty ventures I would make. Oft 
have I said to my love: "At last leave me to 
myself'!" — and she has come forthwith and sat upon 
my lap. Oft have I said: "I am ashamed!'' 
— scarce keeping back her tears, she has answered : 
"Poor me! are vou so soon ashamed of love?" 
and has wound her arms about my neck and given 
me a thousand kisses, to my undoing. I am
vanquished, and summon back my genius from the taking 
up of arms to sing of exploits at home and of my 
own campaigns. 

13 None the less, I did begin to sing of sceptres, 
and through my effort tragedy grew in favour, and 
for that task no one more fit than I. Hut Love 
laughed at my pall and painted buskins, and at the 
sceptre I had so promptly grasped in my unkinglike 
hand. From this ambition, too, the worshipful will 
of my lady drew me away — for she liked it not— and 
Love triumphant drags in his train the buskined 
bard. 

19 What I may, I do. I either profess the art of 
tender love a — ah me, I am caught in the snares of 
my own teaching ! — or I write the words Penelope 
sends her Ulysses, and thy tearful plaint, abandoned 
Phyllis ; what Paris and Marcareus are to read, and 
what ungrateful Jason, and Hippolytus, and
Hippolytus' sire; and what pitiable Dido, with drawn 
blade in her hand, indites, and the Lesbian, loved of 
the Aonian lyre.

27 How quickly has my Sabinus returned from the 
ends of the earth and brought back missives writ in 
far-distant places ! Spotless Penelope has recognized 
the seal of Ulysses; the stepdame has read what was 
penned by her Hippolytus. Already devout Aeneas 
has written back to wretched Elissa, and a letter is 
here for Phyllis to read, if only she live. A missive 
grievous for Hypsipyle has come from Jason : the 
daughter of Lesbos, her love returned, may offer to 
Phoebus the lyre she vowed. 

35 Nor do you, too, Macer, so far as the bard may 
who sings of arms, leave golden Love unsung amid 
your warlike strain. Both Paris and she who loved 
him, misdeed far-famed, are in your song, and
Laodamia, comrade to her lord in death. If I know you 
well, not more gladly you sing of wars than of themes 
like these, and are passing from your camp to mine. 


XIX 

If you feel no need of guarding your love for 
yourself, O fool, see that you guard her for me, that 
I may desire her the more ! What one may do 
freely has no charm ; what one may not do pricks 
more keenly on. He has a heart of iron who loves 
what another concedes. Let us hope while we fear 
and fear while we hope, we lovers, and let repulse 
sometimes be ours to make a place for vows. What 
care I for the fortune that never troubles to deceive ? 
May nothing be mine that never wounds ! 

9 Corinna the artful had marked this weakness in 
me, and shrewdly recognised the means by which to 
snare me. Ah, how often has she feigned an aching 
head when wholly well, and bid me go away when 
my tardy foot delayed ! Ah, how oft has she feigned 
a charge, and put on the air — as far as she could 
with a guiltless man— of attacking me ! Thus, when 
she had stirred me up, and fanned into flame again 
the cooling fires, she would be friendly once more, 
and compliant to my prayers. What winsome ways 
she would have, how sweet she would make her 
words ! And kisses, O great gods, what kisses, and 
how many she would give ! 

19 You, too, who have lately stolen my eyes away, 
see that oft you be fearful of plots, and oft when 
entreated say me nay ; and allow me to stretch 
myself on the threshold of your door and suffer long 
cold through the rimy night. Tis thus my love 
grows hardy, and keeps on waxing through long 
years ; this is what helps it ; 'tis this that nourishes 
my passion. A love fed fat and too compliant is 
turned to cloying, and harms us, like sweet fare that 
harms the stomach. Had Danae never been mewed 
in the brazen tower, Danae would never have been 
made mother by Jove ; as long as Juno guarded 
Io, changed to a horned beast, she made her charm 
greater than before to Jove. Whoever desires the 
unforbidden and easy, let him pluck leaves from 
the tree, and drink water from the mighty stream. 
Would any fair one reign long, let her delude her 
lover. Ah me, may I not meet torment from my 
own advice ! Yet, come what may, to be indulged 
is a bane to me — what follows, I fly ; what flies, I 
follow in turn. 

37 But you, too careless of your pretty dear, begin 
already at nightfall to close your door. Begin to 
ask who it is that so often stealthily beats on your 
threshold," why the dogs bay in the silence of the 
night, what tablets the cunning slave-girl brings and 
takes, why your lady rests so often apart from you. 
Let cares like that gnaw sometimes into your marrows, 
and give me place and matter for my wiles. Who 
would make love with the wife of a fool could steal 
the sands from a deserted shore. I give you warning 
now in time : unless you begin to watch your lady, 
she will begin to cease being mine ! I have borne 
An ancient way of knocking at the door. 
much, and for long; I have often hoped the time 
would come when you would watch her well, that I 
might trick you well. You are slow, and endure 
things unendurable to any husband ; but ah ! for me, 
your complaisance will be the end of me ! 

53 Unhappy that I am, shall I really never be kept 
from seeing her? Shall the night never threaten 
me with someone's revenge? Am I to fear nothing? 
Shall I heave no sighs in the midst of my slumbers? 
Will you do nothing to give me reason to wish you 
dead? What do I want with a facile husband — with 
a husband who is a pander ? With his failing he 
ruins our joys. Why not seek another, whom such 
long-suffering pleases ? If you please to have me 
your rival, forbid it ! 
