I 

Shade of Callimachus and sacred rites of Philetas, 
suffer me, I pray, to enter your grove. I am the 
first with priestly service from an unsullied spring to 
carry Italian mysteries among the dances of Greece. 
Tell me, in what grotto did ye weave your songs 
together? With what step did ye enter? What 
sacred fountain did ye drink ? 

7 Away with the man who keeps Phoebus tarrying 
among the weapons of war ! Let verse run smoothly, 
polished with fine pumice. Tis by such verse as this 
that Fame lifts me aloft from earth, and the Muse, 
my daughter, triumphs with garlanded steeds, and 
tiny Loves ride with me in my chariot, and a throng 
of writers follows my wheels. Why strive ye against 
me vainly with loosened rein ? Narrow is the path 
that leadeth to the Muses. Many, O Rome, shall 
add fresh glories to thine annals, singing that Bactra 
shall be thine empire's bound ; but this work of mine 
my pages have brought down from the Muses' mount 
by an untrodden way, that thou mayest read it in 
the midst of peace. 

19 Pegasid Muses, give soft garlands to your poet : 
no hard crown will suit my brow. But that whereof 
the envious throng have robbed me in life, Glory 
after death shall repay with double interest. After 
death lapse of years makes all things seem greater ; 
after the rites of burial a name rings greater on 
the lips of men. Else who would know aught of 
the citadel shattered by the horse of fir-wood, or 
how rivers strove in mortal conflict with Haemonia's 
hero ? Who would know aught of Idaean Simois and 
Scamander sprung from Jove, or that the chariot- 
wheel thrice dragged Hector foully o'er the plain ? 
Scarce would their own land know Deiphobus, 
Helenus, and Pulydamas, and Paris that sorry warrior. 
Little talk now would there be of thee, Ilion, and of 
thee, Troy, twice captured by the power of Oeta's 
god. Nay, even Homer, that told thy fall, hath seen 
his work grow in fame through lapse of after-years 
Me too shall Rome praise in the voices of late-born 
generations; myself I foresee that day beyond the 
fatal pyre. No man shall spurn the grave where the 
headstone marks my bones ! So ordaineth Lycia's 
god, for he hath approved my vows. 


II 

Meanwhile let us return to our wonted round of 
song ; let the heart of my mistress be moved with 
joy at the old familiar music. They say that Orpheus 
with his Thracian lyre tamed wild beasts and stayed 
rushing rivers, and that Cithaeron's rocks were 
driven to Thebes by the minstrel's art and of their 
own will gathered to frame a wall. Nay, Galatea too 
beneath wild Etna turned her steeds that dripped 
with brine to the sound of thy songs, Polyphemus. 

9 What marvel, when Bacchus and Apollo smile on 
me, that a host of maidens should adore my words ? 
My house is not stayed on Taenarian columns ; I have 
no ivory chamber with gilded beams ; no orchards 
have I to vie with Phaeacia's trees, nor hath art 
built me grottoes watered by the Marcian fount. But 
the Muses are my comrades, and my songs are dear 
to them that read, nor ever is Calliope aweary with 
my dancing.

17 Happy she that book of mine hath praised ! My 
songs shall be so many memorials of thy beauty. 
For neither the Pyramids built skyward at such 
cost, nor the house of Jove at Elis that matches 
heaven, nor the wealth of Mausolus' tomb are exempt 
from the end imposed by death. Their glory is 
stolen away by fire or rain, or the strokes of time 
whelm them to ruin crushed by their own weight. 
But the fame that my wit hath won shall never 
perish : for wit renown endureth deathless. 


III 

Methought I lay in the soft shades of Helicon, 
where flows the fountain of Bellerophon's steed, and 
deemed I had the power with sinews such as mine to 
sing of thy kings, O Alba, and the deeds of thy 
kings, a mighty task. Already I had set my puny 
lips to those mighty fountains, whence father Ennius 
once slaked his thirst and sang of the Curian brothers 
and the javelins of the Horatii and the royal trophies 
borne in Aemilius' bark, of the victorious delays of 
Fabius, the fatal fight of Cannae and the gods that 
turned to answer pious prayers, of the Lares frighting 
Hannibal from their Roman home, and of Jove saved 
by the cackling goose. 

13 But of a sudden Phoebus espied me from his 
Castalian grove and spake thus, leaning on his golden 
lyre nigh to a cavern : " Madman, what hast thou to do 
with such a stream ? Who bade thee essay the task 
of heroic song ? Not hence, Propertius, mayest thou 
hope for fame ! Soft are the meads o'er which thy 
little wheels must roll, that oft thy book may be read 
by some lonely girl, that waits her absent lover, and 
oft be cast upon the stool at her feet. Why has thy 
page swerved from the ring prescribed for it ? The 
shallop of thy wit can bear no heavy cargo ! Let one 
oar skim the water, the other the sand ; so shalt thou 
be safe : mighty is the turmoil in mid-sea/' He spake, 
and with his ivory quill showed me a dwelling, where 
a new path had been made along the mossy floor. 

27 Here was a green cave, its walls lined with 
pebbles, and timbrels hung from its hollowed stones ; 
there hung also the mystic instruments of the Muses 
and the clay image of father Silenus, and thy 
reeds, O Pan of Tegea ; and doves, birds of my lady 
Venus, the birds I love, dipped their red bills in the 
Gorgon's fount, while here and there the Maidens 
nine, to each of whom the lot hath given her several 
realm, busied their soft hands about their diverse gifts. 
One gathered ivy for the thyrsus-wand, another tuned 
her song to the music of the lyre, a third with either 
hand wove wreaths of roses. 

87 Then one of the number of these goddesses laid 
her hand upon me — 'twas Calliope, as I deem by her 
face : " Thou shalt alway be content to be drawn by 
snowy swans, nor shall the tramp of the war-horse 
lead thee to battle. Care not thou with hoarse 
trumpet-blast to blare forth martial advertisement 
nor to stain Aonia's grove with war. Care not thou 
in what fields the battle is arrayed beneath Marius' 
standard, and Rome beats back the Teuton's power, 
nor where the wild Rhine, steeped with the Swabian's 
blood, bears mangled bodies down its sorrowing 
waves. 

47 " For thou shalt sing of garlanded lovers watching
before another's threshold, and the tokens of 
drunken flight through the dark, that he who would 
cheat stern husbands by his cunning may through 
thee have power to charm forth his imprisoned love." 
So spake Calliope, and, drawing water from the fount, 
sprinkled my lips with the draught Philetas loved. 


IV 

Caesar our god plans war against rich Ind and 
would cleave with his fleet the waters of the pearl- 
bearing sea. Great is the prize, men of Rome: 
furthest earth prepares triumphs for thee, Tiber, and 
Euphrates shall flow beneath thy sway. Late shall 
that province come beneath Ausonia's rods, yet it 
shall surely come; Parthia's trophies shall become 
familiar with Latin Jupiter. Go now, ye prows well 
skilled in war, unfurl your sails ; ye war-horses, ply 
the task ye know so well ! I sing you prospering 
omens. Avenge Crassus and his slaughter ! Go forth 
and make fair the pages of Rome's story ! 

11 O father Mars and ye fires of fate, that burn for 
holy Vesta, I implore you, may that day come ere I 
die, on which I shall see Caesar's chariots laden with 
spoils and his steeds oft halting at sound of the 
people's cheers ; then as I lie reclined on the bosom 
of my beloved I will read the names of captured 
cities, and will turn mine eyes to gaze at the shafts 
that were hurled by flying horsemen, at the bows of 
trousered warriors and the captive chiefs that sit 
beneath the arms that once they bore. 

19 Venus, keep safe thine offspring ; may that life, 
that before thine eyes still preserves Aeneas' line, live 
through all ages ! Be the spoil theirs whose toil has 
won it ! Enough for me to be able to cheer them on 
the Sacred Way. 


V 

Love is a god of peace : we lovers worship peace : 
enough for me the hard warfare I wage with my 
mistress. My soul is not so racked with lust for hateful 
gold, nor drinks my thirst from cups of precious stone, 
nor is fat Campania ploughed for me by a thousand 
yokes, nor do I get me bronzes from thy ruin,
hapless Corinth. 

7 Ah! primeval earth so unkind to Prometheus' 
fashioning hand ! With too little care he moulded 
the human heart. He ordered men's bodies, but 
forgot the mind as he plied his art ; straight before 
all else should have been the path of the soul. Now 
o'er such wide seas are we tempest-tossed ; we seek 
out a foe, and pile fresh war on war. Yet no wealth 
shalt thou carry to the waves of Acheron: naked, 
thou fool, thou shalt be borne to the ship of Hell. 
There victor and vanquished shades are mingled in 
equality of death : captive Jugurtha, thou sittest
beside the consul Marius ; Lydian Croesus is as Dulichian 
Irus ! That death is best that comes apace when we 
have had our joy of life. - 

19 My delight is it to have worshipped Helicon in my 
earliest youth and to have entwined my hands in the 
Muses' dance. Be it my delight also to bind my soul 
with deep Lyaean draughts and ever to have wreaths 
of spring roses about my brow. And when the 
burdening years have set a stay to love, and
whitening age hath flecked my black locks, then be it my 
pleasure to learn the ways of nature, to learn what 
god rules by his wisdom this quarter of the world, 
how comes the rising moon, how wanes, and how each 
month its horns are orbed again to the full ; whence 
sweep the winds in triumph over the sea, what seeks 
the East Wind with his blast, and whence the clouds 
draw their unfailing water ; whether a day shall come 
to o'erthrow the citadels of the world ; why the bright 
bow drinks up the rain-water, why the peaks of 
Perrhaebian Pindus have trembled, why mourned the 
sun's disk with dark-robed steeds, why Bootes is late 
to turn his oxen and wain, why the band of Pleiads 
shine with close-set fires, why the deep outsteps not 
its bounds, and why the full year hath four seasons 
in its round ; whether there be gods that rule
underground and giants that suffer torment, and Tisiphone's 
brow be wild with black snakes ; whether Alcmaeon 
be plagued with Furies and Phineus with fasting, 
whether there be the wheel, the rolling rock, the 
thirst in the water's midst; whether Cerberus guards 
with triple throat the cave of Hell, and nine acres 
are all too few for Tityos ; or if the tale that hath 
come down to wretched mortals be an empty dream 
and there is naught to dread beyond the pyre. 
Such is the close of life that waits for me : do ye to 
whom arms are dearest bring home the standards of 
Crassus ! 


VI 

Tell me truly what thou thinkest of my love : so, 
Lygdamus, be the yoke of thy mistress taken from 
thy neck. Dost thou cheat me and make me swell 
with baseless joy, telling me such news as thou thinkst 
I would fain believe ? Every messenger should be 
blameless of lying, and a slave should be all the 
truer by reason of his fear. Now set forth thy tale 
to me from the first beginning, if thou rememberest 
aught ; I will listen with eager ears. 

9 Did her tears rain even so when thou beheldest her 
weep with hair dishevelled ? Didst thou see no mirror, 
Lygdamus, on her couch ? Did no jewelled ring adorn 
her snowy hands? Didst thou see a sad-hued robe 
hang from her soft arms, and did her toilet caskets lie 
closed at the bed's foot ? Was the house sad, and 
sad her handmaids as they plied their tasks, and was 
she knitting in their midst ? Did she press the wool 
to her eyes to dry their moisture, and repeat my 
chidings with plaintive tone ? " Is this the reward 
he promised me in thy hearing, Lygdamus ? Perjury 
may be punished, though the witness be but a slave. 
Can he leave me thus to weep with never an act of 
love, and keep in his house one such as I would not 
name ? He rejoices that I pine forlorn in my empty 
bed. If it please him, Lygdamus, let him mock me 
even in death ! 'Twas by no winning ways, but by 
magic herbs, that she, the wretch, hath conquered me : 
he is led captive by the magic wheel whirled on 
its string. He is drawn to her by the monstrous 
charms of the swelling bramble-toad and by the 
bones she has gathered from dried serpents, by the 
owl-feathers found on low-lying tombs, and the 
woollen fillet bound about the doomed man. I 
call thee to witness, Lygdamus ; if my dreams lie 
not, he shall yield me vengeance, late, yet ample, 
as he grovels at my feet. The spider shall weave 
her mouldering threads about his empty couch, and 
Venus herself shall slumber on the night of their 
embrace." 

35 If my love spake these words with truth in her 
soul, run back, Lygdamus, by the way thou earnest. 
Bear back this message from me with many tears, 
that my passion may have stooped to anger, but 
never to guile, that I am tormented by like flame 
to hers : I will swear that for twice six days I have 
known no woman. Then if blest peace shall spring 
from such fierce war, as far as I may serve thee, 
Lygdamus, thou art free ! 


VII 

Thou, therefore, money, art the cause that life is 
full of care ! 'tis for thee we go down to death ere 
our time ; 'tis thou that givest men's vices cruel 
nourishment, thou art the fount whence spring the 
seeds of woe : 'twas thou that thrice and four times 
didst whelm with raging seas Paetus that set his sails 
toward Pharos' haven. 

7 Poor wretch, while he followed thee he was 
snatched away from life's first bloom, and floats 
strange food for fishes far away. His mother might 
not give burial due to the dust of him that loved 
her, nor lay him in earth amid the ashes of his 
kin. But the birds of the sea stand now above 
thy bones, and thou hast for sepulchre the whole 
Carpathian main. Ah ! cruel North Wind, ravished 
Orithyia's dread, what great harvest of spoil couldst 
thou win from him ? Or why, Neptune, delightest 
thou in shipwreck ? Righteous men were they that 
voyaged in that hull. Paetus, why count' st thou 
o'er thy years ? Why, as thou swimmest, is thy 
dear mother's name upon thy lips ? The wave 
hath no gods to hear thee. Thy cables were made 
fast to the rocks, but the storms of the night 
shore through their strands and swept them all 
away. 

25 Give back his body to earth, his life lies lost in 
the deep ; sands without worth, drift at your will and 
cover Paetus. And oft as the mariner passes Paetus' 
tomb let him say : « Thou canst bring terror even to 
the brave ! " Go to now, build curving keels, weave 
engines of death : 'tis from man's hands come deaths 
like this. Earth was too small for death, we have 
added the waves : by our craft have we enlarged the 
cruel paths of fortune. Should the anchor hold thee, 
whom thy home could not hold ? What shouldst 
thou say he merits, that finds his native land too 
small ? Whate'er thou buildest is sport of the 
winds ; no keel hath e'er grown old ; even the haven 
keeps not faith. Nature with guile hath made the 
sea a path for greed : scarce once may success 
be thine. There are shores that bear witness to 
Agamemnon's woe, where the doom of Argynnus 
brands the waves of Mimas ; for the loss of this boy 
Atrides would not launch his ships and for this tarrying 
was Iphigenia slain. The rocks of Caphareus brake 
a triumphant fleet, when shipwrecked Greece was 
engulfed by the wild brine. Ulysses wept the loss 
of his comrades one by one ; against the sea alone 
his wiles had no power. 

43 But if Paetus had been content to plough his 
fields with his father's kine, and had counted my 
words of weight, still would he live to feast in 
merriment before his household gods; poor though 
he were, yet on dry land would he have naught 
to beweep, save only lack of wealth. Paetus could 
not endure to hear the shrieking gale, nor to wound 
his delicate hands with the hard cordage; his 
rather to lie in a chamber of Chian marble or on 
a couch of Orician terebinth, his head propped on 
down of rainbow hues. Yet from him while still he 
lived did the wave rend his nails, and right loth, 
poor wretch, his gasping throat gulped down the 
waters : yet him did the wild night see borne on a 
slender plank : so many ills conspired for the death 
of Paetus. Natheless with his last lamentations he 
gave this charge and wept, when the dark wave was 
closing his dying lips : " Ye gods of the Aegean that 
have power over the waters, ye winds and every 
wave that weighs down my head, whither snatch ye 
the hapless years of my first bloom ? Was there 
guilt on the hands that I brought to your seas ? Ah ! 
woe is me ! The sharp rocks where the seamew 
nests shall batter me ! The god of the blue deep 
hath smitten me with his trident. Yet at least may 
the tide cast me up on Italian shores : little though 
there be left of me, 'twill suffice if but it reach my 
mother." Even as he spake these words the wave 
with twisting eddy dragged him down ; thus passed 
from Paetus speech and life together. 

67 Ye hundred daughters of Nereus, maids of the 
sea, and thou Thetis, whom a mother's love once drew 
from out the deep, ye should have placed your arms 
beneath his weary chin : he was no heavy burden for 
your hands. But thou, fierce wind of the North, 
never shalt thou see my sails ; mine rather before my 
mistress' doors to lay me down, adventuring naught. 


VIII 

Right glad am I of our brawl by the lamplight
yestereve and all the railings of thy frenzied tongue, when 
mad with wine thou didst thrust away the table and 
cast goblets of wine at me with angry hand. Nay, 
be bold ! Assail my hair and scar my face with thy 
fair talons ! Threaten to hold fire beneath mine eyes 
and burn them from their sockets ! Tear my raiment 
and leave my bosom bare ! 

9 In all this forsooth thou givest me tokens of thy 
love be strong. She, that hurls taunts with raving 
tongue, lies grovelling at the feet of mighty Venus ; 
she throngs herself close with flocks of guardians, 
or rushes down the street like some frenzied Maenad ; 
or wild dreams fright her timid soul continually, or 
the painted portrait of some girl fills her with woe. 
From all these torments of soul I draw sure auguries : 
these have I learned to be the signs of constant 
passion. No love is constant that cannot be provoked 
to quarrel : be girls that naught may move the fate 
of them that hate me. 

21 Let my comrades see the wounds where her teeth 
have torn my neck ; let dark bruises show that my 
love hath been with me. I would have sorrow myself 
in love, or else hear thine ; I would see thy tears or 
else mine own, that fall if ever thou sendest secret 
messages with nodding brow, or with thy fingers 
writest words thou wouldst not speak aloud. I hate 
those sighs that never break through sleep : 'tis for 
an angry mistress I would ever be pale with longing. 
Sweeter to Paris was his passion's fire, when he must 
cleave his way through the hosts of Greece ere he 
could bring joy to his love, the daughter of
Tyndareus. While the Danaans conquered, while savage 
Hector barred their path, he waged a mightier war 
in Helen's arms. Either with thee or for thee with 
my rival will I wage truceless war : where thou art, 
peace hath for me no pleasure.


VIIIa 

Rejoice that none is fair as thou ! Thou wouldst 
grieve if there were any. But now thou hast just 
cause for pride. 

37 But for thee, that didst spread a snare for our 
love, may thy wife's father live for ever and thy house 
ne'er have peace from her mother ! If ever thou 
wast granted the boon of one stolen night, 'twas 
anger against me, not love for thee, that made her 
grant it. 


IX 

Maecenas, knight sprung from the blood of Tuscan 
kings, that wouldst fain abide within thy fortune's 
scope, why dost thou launch me on so wide a sea of 
song ? Such spreading canvas suits not a bark like 
mine. 

6 It brings but shame to take upon thine head a 
burden that thou canst not bear, and soon to bow 
the knee and turn in flight. All things are not meet 
alike for all men ; from different heights the palm of 
fame is won. 'Tis Lysippus' glory to mould statues 
with all the fire of life ; Calamis, methinks, boasts the 
perfection of his carven steeds; Apelles claims his 
highest glory from his painting of Venus ; Parrhasius 
asserts his place by his miniature art ; groups rather 
are the themes of Mentor's mould ; in the works of 
Mys the acanthus winds on its brief way ; the Jove 
of Phidias arrays himself in a statue of ivory ; the 
marble in Triops' city gives Praxiteles glory. Some 
race their victorious chariots at Elis ; for the swift 
feet of some was glory born ; one was begotten for 
peace, another is meet for the weapons of war ; each 
man follows the seeds of his own nature. 

21 But I, Maecenas, have taken to heart thy rule 
of life, and am driven to vanquish thee with thine 
own example. Though as a magistrate of Rome 
thou mightest plant thine imperious axes where thou 
wouldst and deal justice in the Forum's midst ; though 
thou mightest pass through the fierce Medians' spears 
and load thy house with trophies of arms; though 
Caesar gives thee strength for success, and at all 
seasons ready wealth pours into thy purse, yet holdest 
thou back and dost withdraw in lowly wise to modest 
shades, and of thine own choice furlest the swelling 
canvas of thy sails. Believe me, thy resolve shall 
rival the great deeds of Camillus, and thou also shalt 
be a name upon the lips of men, and thy footsteps 
shall accompany the fame of Caesar; thy loyalty, 
Maecenas, shall be thy true trophy of triumph. I 
cleave not the swelling sea with sail-borne keel : 
I do but loiter in the shelter of a little stream. I 
will not tell in tearful strain how Cadmus' citadel 
sank into ashes beneath the Father's fire, nor of 
the seven fights, each closed with like disaster ; 
I will not tell of the Scaean gate and Pergama, 
Apollo's citadel, nor how the Danaan ships returned 
in the tenth spring, when the wooden horse, wrought 
by the cunning of Pallas, won the day and made 
the walls, that Neptune built, to be razed by the 
Greek plough. Enough for me to have found
acceptance among the books of Callimachus and to have 
sung, O Dorian poet, in strains like thine. Let my 
writings kindle boys and girls to love ! Let them 
acclaim me as a god and bring me sacrifice ! 

47 Be thou my leader, then will I sing of the arms 
of Jove, of Coeus threatening heaven and Eurymedon 
on Phlegra's hills : then will I set forth to tell of 
the kings that were reared together at the wild 
beast's teat, of the walls that were established by 
the slaying of Remus, and of the lofty Palatine 
grazed by the steers of Rome ; and my wit shall 
grow to the height of thy commands. I will hymn 
thy chariots that triumph from the East and from 
the West, the shafts now idle of the Parthian' s 
crafty flight, the camp of Pelusium o'erthrown by 
the sword of Rome, and Antony whose own hands 
wrought his doom. 

67 Do thou but grant thy kindly favour, take the 
reins that guide my youthful course and give me 
favouring applause when my wheels speed forth in 
the race. This is the glory thou grantest me, 
Maecenas, and to thee 'tis due that men shall say 
that I, even I, have followed thine example. 


X 

I wondered what omen the Muses had sent me as 
they stood before my couch in the red sunlight 
of dawn. They sent me a token that 'twas the 
birthday of my mistress, and thrice with propitious 
sound they clapped their hands. May this day pass 
to its close without a cloud, may the winds be
motionless in heaven, and may the threatening wave sink to 
calm on the dry shore. To-day may I see none that 
mourn, and may even the rock that is Niobe
withhold its tears. May the sea-birds' mouths have rest, 
hushed from their wailing, and the mother of Itys 
cease to moan his death. 

11 And do thou, beloved, born under happy auguries,
rise and pray to the gods that demand their due 
offering. First with pure water wash sleep from off 
thee, and with thy finger's impress tire thy shining 
hair. Next don that robe wherein thou first didst 
snare the eyes of Propertius, and let thy brows not 
lack a crown of flowers. And pray that the beauty 
that is thy might may endure alway, and that thou 
may est be the queen of my heart for ever. Then 
when thou hast appeased the wreathed altars with 
incense and their fire hath flashed its blessing through 
all the house, give thy thoughts to feasting. Let night 
speed mid the wine-cup, and let the casket of yellow 
onyx make glad our nostrils with oil of saffron ; let 
the hoarse pipe blow for the midnight dance till it 
give o'er for weariness, and let thy wanton words 
come fast and free. Let the merry banquet keep 
unwelcome slumbers far, and let the air of the
neighbouring street ring loud that all may hear. Let us 
cast lots, let the fall of the dice reveal to us those 
whom the boy god lashes with heavy pinions. And 
then when the hours have been sped by many a 
goblet and Venus appoints those mysteries that 
wait on night, let us with all solemnity perform the 
anniversary's rite in our chamber, and thus complete 
the path of thy natal day. 


XI 

Why marvel lest thou that a woman sways my life 
and drags my manhood captive beneath her rule ? 
Why falsely dost thou hurl at me the foul taunt of 
cowardice, because I cannot snap my chains and break 
my yoke ? Tis the mariner best foretells his coming 
doom, 'tis wounds that teach the soldier fear. I once 
spake boasts like thine in my past youth : now let my 
example teach thee to be afraid. 

9 The witch of Colchis drove the fiery bulls beneath 
the adamantine yoke and sowed battles in the warrior-
bearing earth, and closed the fierce, gaping jaws 
of the guardian snake, that the fleece of gold might 
go to Aeson's halls. Maeotian Penthesilea once dared 
on horseback to assail the Danaan ships with her 
arrows, even she whose bright beauty conquered the 
conquering hero, when the helm of gold laid bare her 
brow. Omphale, the maid of Lydia, bathed in the 
Gygean lake, rose to such renown of beauty that 
lie, who had set up his pillars in the world he had 
tamed to peace, with horny hands plucked soft tasks 
of wool. Semiramis stablished Babylon, the Persian's 
city, in such wise that it rose a solid mass with wall 
of brick, and two chariots might be sent to meet 
each other nor graze their sides with touching axles ; 
and through the midst of the citadel which she 
founded she led Euphrates, and bade Bactra bow its 
head to her sway. 

27 Why should I tell of heroes, why taunt the 
gods with sin ? Jove brings shame on himself and 
on his house. Why should I tell of her that of late 
heaped insults on our arms, that woman who found 
lovers even among her slaves, and claimed the walls 
of Rome and the Senate enslaved to her tyranny as 
a fee from her foul paramour ? Guilty Alexandria, 
land most skilled in guile, and Memphis so often 
bloodstained with our woe, where the sand robbed 
Pompey of his three triumphs ! No day shall ever free 
thee of this stain, O Rome ! Better for thee, Pompey, 
had thy funeral gone forth on the Phlegrean plain, 
or hadst thou been doomed to bow thy neck to thy 
wife's father ! Forsooth the harlot queen of unchaste 
Canopus, the one disgrace branded on Rome by the 
race of Philip, dared to match barking Anubis against 
our Roman Jove, to force Tiber to endure the threats 
of Nile, to drive out the Roman trumpet with rattling 
sistrum and with poled barge to pursue the
Liburnian galley, to stretch her foul curtains on the 
Tarpeian rock, and to give judgment amid the arms 
and statues of Marius. The city high-throned on the 
seven hills, the queen of all the world, was terrified 
by a woman's might and feared her threats I What 
boots it now to have broken the axes of Tarquin, whose 
proud life brands him with the name of " proud/' if 
we must needs endure a woman's tyranny ? Rome, 
take thy triumph and, saved from doom, implore 
long life for Augustus. Yet didst thou fly, O queen, 
to the wandering streams of timorous Nile ! Thy 
hands received the chains of Rome. I saw her arms 
bitten by the sacred asps, I saw her limbs drink in 
slumber as it worked its secret way. " Thou needst 
not have feared me, Rome, with such a citizen to 
guard thee ! " so spake even the tongue that deep 
draughts of wine had enslaved. 

61 Curtius closed the gulf and made himself an
everlasting memorial : Decius brake the battle-line with 
charging steed ; the path of Codes still tells of the 
cutting of the bridge : and one there is who won his 
name from a raven. The gods founded these walls, 
and the gods protect them ; while Caesar lives scarce 
should Rome fear the wrath of Jove ! Now where 
are Scipio's fleets, where the standards of Camillus, 
or thou, O Bosporus, so lately captured by the might 
of Pompey ? Where are the spoils of Hannibal and 
the trophies of conquered Syphax, and Pyrrhus' glory 
broken beneath our feet? Leucadian Apollo shall 
tell how the hosts were turned to flight : one day of 
war swept away so vast an armament ! But do thou, 
O mariner, whether thou seekest or leavest the haven, 
remember Caesar o'er all the Ionian main. 


XII 

Postumus, hadst thou the heart to leave Galla
weeping and to follow the gallant standards of Augustus 
to the wars? Was any glory from Parthia's spoils 
worth aught to thee, when thy Galla oft prayed 
thee not to go? If it be lawful, may all ye that 
are greedy for gold perish alike, and with you the 
man that loves arms more than a faithful bride ! 

7 Yet thou, madman, with thy cloak cast about thee 
for covering shalt drink the water of Araxes from 
thy helmet when thou art weary ; and she meanwhile 
will pine at each idle rumour, for fear lest thy valour 
cost thee dear, or lest the Median arrows rejoice 
in thy death or the mailed soldier on his gilded 
steed ; or lest some scanty relics of thee be brought 
home in an urn for her to weep ; thus they return 
that perish in those lands. 

15 Thrice and four times blest, O Postumus, art 
thou in Galla' s chastity! With a heart like thine 
thou wast worthy of a different spouse ! What will a 
woman do with no fear for safeguard, when there is 
Rome to teach its luxury ? But go without fear ; no 
gifts shall conquer Galla and she will not remember 
thy cruelty. For whensoe'er fate sends thee home 
in safety, chaste Galla shall hang about thy neck. 
Postumus shall be another Ulysses with a wife to wake 
men's wonder : no hurt did Ulysses suffer from his 
long tarrying, no hurt from the ten years' leaguer, 
from Ismara the Ciconians' mount, from Calpe, and 
thereafter the burning of thine eye, O Polyphemus ; 
no hurt from the guile of Circe, the lotos with its 
binding spell, nor from Scylla and Charybdis, cloven 
with alternate ebb and flow, nor when Lampetie's 
oxen bellowed on the Ithacan spits (Lampetie, 
Phoebus' daughter, had pastured them for her sire), 
nor when he fled from the couch of Aeaea's weeping 
queen, or swam the deep so many nights and days, 
entered the dark halls of the silent ghosts, and with 
deaf oarsmen drew nigh the Siren's pools, revived 
his ancient bow with the suitors' slaughter, and thus 
set a term to his wanderings. And not in vain, for 
his wife had remained true to him at home. Aelia 
Galla shall surpass Penelope's fidelity. 


XIII 

Ye ask, wherefore the greed of women makes their 
love so costly, and wherefore our empty coffers cry 
out that Venus has been their bane. Clear and 
undoubted is the cause of such vast ruin; the path 
of luxury has grown overfree. The Indian ant 
sends gold from the caves of the mine, the nautilus 
shell comes from the Red Sea ; Cadmean Tyre sends 
hues of purple, and the Arab shepherd rich-scented 
cinnamon. These weapons storm the hearts even of 
close-guarded virgins and such as are cold as thou, O 
daughter of Icarius. Matrons go forth arrayed in 
spendthrifts' fortunes and flaunt the spoils of infamy 
before our eyes. No shame is there in asking or in 
giving ; or if any there be, even reluctance is banished 
at a price. 

16 Blest is that peerless law for the burial of Eastern 
husbands, whom the crimson dawn colours with her 
steeds ! For when the last torch is set to the dead 
man's bier his wives stand round, a pious company 
with streaming hair, and struggle for death one with 
another, who living shall follow her dead lord ; 'tis 
shame to be debarred from death. The victors burn 
and offer their breasts to the flame and lay charred faces 
on their husband's body. But here the race of brides 
is faithless ; here doth no woman show Evadne's faith 
or Penelope's loyalty. 

26 Happy the young that dwelt in peace of old, 
whose wealth was in harvest and orchard. Their 
offerings were Cydonian apples shaken from the 
bough ; they gave baskets filled with purple brambles, 
now with their hands plucked violets, now brought 
home shining lilies mingled together in the maidens' 
paniers, and carried grapes clad in their own leaves 
or some dappled bird of rainbow plumage. Bought 
by such wooing as this were the kisses that girls 
gave their silvan lovers in secret caves. A roe- 
deer's skin was enough to cover two lovers, and 
the grass grew tall to make them nature's couch 
The pine bowed o'er them and cast its rich shade 
about them ; nor was it a sin to see goddesses naked : 
the horned ram of his own accord led back his ewes 
sated with grazing to the empty fold of the shepherd 
god. All gods and goddesses that guard the
countryside spake kindly words to the hearths of men. 
" Stranger, whoe'er thou art that comest, thou shalt 
hunt the hare in my paths or the bird, if bird thou 
seekest : and whether thou pursuest thy prize with 
lime-rod or with hound, call me Pan from the crag to 
be thy comrade." 

47 But now the shrines lie neglected in deserted 
groves : piety is vanquished and all men worship gold. 
Gold has banished faith, gold has made judgment to 
be bought and sold, gold rules the law, and, law once 
gone, rules chastity as well. 

51 Portals of burning fire bear witness to the 
sacrilege of Brennus, when he assailed the Pythian 
realms of the god unshorn : and soon Parnassus shook 
its laurel-bearing peak and scattered dread snows 
over the arms of Gaul. Thee, Polydorus, did guilty 
Polymestor, lord of Thrace, won by the lure of gold, 
nurture with treacherous hospitality. That thou too, 
Eriphyla, mightest deck thy shoulders with gold, the 
steeds of Amphiaraus are sunken and earth knows 
him no more. 

59 I will speak out ; and may my country find me 
a true seer ! Rome is being shattered by her own 
prosperity. I speak sure truth, but none believe me ; 
for neither was the frenzied maid of Ilium ever to 
be deemed a true seer amid the woes of Troy : she 
only cried that Paris was building Phrygians doom, 
she only that, freighted with treachery, the horse 
stole on her home. Her madness carried profit for 
her country and for her sire. The tongue that none 
believed proved that the gods were true. 


XIV 

At many of the laws of thy wrestling-grounds do I 
marvel, O Sparta, but most at the plenteous blessings 
of the schools where thy women train, inasmuch as 
a girl may without blame disport her body naked 
among wrestling men, when the swift-thrown ball 
cheats the player's grasp and the hooked rod clanks 
against the rolling hoop, and dust-besprinkled the 
woman stands at the race's furthest goal and endures 
wounds in the cruel boxing-match. Now she binds 
the glove to her hands that rejoice in its thongs, now 
whirls in a circle the discus' flying weight ; now with 
hoar-frost sprinkling her hair she follows her father's 
hounds o'er the long ridges of Taygetus, now tramples 
the ring with her steeds, girds the sword to her 
snowy flank and shields her virgin head with hollow 
bronze, like the warrior throng of Amazons who 
bathe bare-bosomed in Thermodon's stream, or as 
Pollux and Castor on Eurotas' sands, the one destined 
to conquer with his fists, the other with his steeds : 
amid these twain, men say, Helen bared her breasts 
and carried arms, nor called a blush to her brother's 
cheek. 

21 Thus Sparta's law forbids lovers to hold aloof 
and grants to each to walk by his mistress' side in the 
open streets ; there none fear for her honour nor keep 
her under watch and ward : there none need dread 
the bitter vengeance of some stern husband. Thou 
needst no herald ; thyself thou mayst speak of thine 
own business ; no long delay shall affront thee. No 
raiment of Tyrian purple beguiles the wandering 
eyes of lovers, nor shall thy mistress vex thee with 
long tiring of her scented hair. 

29 But here my love goes girt by a vast crowd, 
leaving no narrow passage whereby so much as a 
finger may reach her. Nor canst thou discover what 
mien to wear nor with what words to proffer thy
request : shrouded in darkness is the path o'er which 
the lover ponders. But if thou, O Rome, wouldst but 
follow the laws and wrestling of the Spartans, then 
wouldst thou be the dearer to me for this blessing. 

XV 

So may I know no further storms in my love, nor 
may ever the night come whereon I must lie wakeful 
without thee ! When the modesty of my boyhood's 
garb was hidden away, and freedom was given me 
to know the paths of love, 'twas she, Lycinna, won, ah 
me ! by no gifts of mine, that initiated my innocent 
soul on those first nights wherein she shared my love. 
'Tis now the third year since then, but little less, and 
I can scarce remember that ten words have passed 
between us. All things thy love has buried, nor since 
thee has any woman cast sweet chains about my neck. 

[Spare Lycinna, lest vengeance fall on thee] Dirce 
shall be my witness, Dirce maddened with anger by 
the tale none might gainsay, that Antiope, daughter 
of Nycteus, had lain with Lycus. Ah ! how often 
did the queen burn her fair tresses and clutch her 
tender face with relentless hands ! How often she 
loaded her handmaid with unjust tasks and bade 
her lay her head upon the hard ground ! Often she 
suffered her to dwell in foul darkness, oft she refused 
even worthless water to allay her thirst. Jove, wilt 
thou never aid Antiope so deep in woe ? The 
hard chains gall her hands. If thou art a god, 'tis 
shame that she whom thou didst love should be a 
slave ; on whom should Antiope call from her fetters 
save on Jove ? Yet unaided, summoning all her 
body's strength, with either hand she brake the 
tyrant chains. Then with trembling feet she ran to 
the heights of Cithaeron. 'Twas night, and her 
couch was bitter with scattered frost. Oft scared by 
the wandering sound of the rushing Asopus, she 
deemed that the feet of her mistress were pursuing. 
Her tears found Zethus unmoved and Amphion 
pitiful, when she, their mother, was driven from the 
steading that was of right her own. And as when 
the waves give over their huge heavings, what time 
the East Wind ceases to strive with the wind of 
the South- West, and so the shore is stilled and the 
sound of the wave-swept sand grows less and less, so 
gradually sank she down on her bended knee. At 
length, though late, they showed their love ; her sons 
knew their error. Worthy wert thou, old man, to 
tend the sons of Jove ; thou didst restore the mother 
to her boys, and they bound Dirce beneath the head 
of a fierce bull to be dragged to death. Antiope, 
recognise the power of Jove ! Dirce, now thy proud 
boast, is drawn along to find death in many a spot. 
The fields of Zethus are red with blood, and Amphion 
sang the paean of victory on thy rocks, O Aracynthus. 

43 But do thou spare to torment guiltless Lycinna : 
anger of jealous woman knows no turning back. And 
may no tale concerning us ever alarm thine ears ; 
may I love thee only even when the funeral pile 
hath consumed me. 


XVI 

'Twas midnight when a letter came to me from my 
mistress bidding me come without delay to Tibur, 
where the white hills heave up their towers to right 
and left and Anio's waters plunge into spreading 
pools. What should I do? Trust myself to the 
dark that shrouded all and tremble lest my limbs 
should be gripped by ruffian hands ? Yet if I should 
put off obedience out of fear, her tears would be 
more terrible than any midnight foe. Once had I 
sinned, and was rejected for a whole year long. 
Against me her hands are merciless. 

11 Yet there is none would hurt a lover : lovers are 
sacred : lovers might travel Sciron's road unscathed. 
A lover, though he walk on Scythia's shores, will find 
none so savage as to have heart to harm him. The 
moon lights his path ; the stars show forth the rough 
places, and Love himself waves the flaming torch 
before him; the fierce watchdog turns aside his 
gaping fangs. For such as him the road is safe at 
any hour. Who is so cruel as to embrue his hands 
in a lover's worthless blood, above all when Venus 
herself bears him company ? 

21 But did I know that if I perished I should surely 
receive due rites of burial, death would be worth the 
purchase at such price. She will bring unguents to 
my pyre and adorn my tomb with wreaths, she will 
sit beside my grave and keep watch there. God 
grant she place not my bones in some crowded spot, 
where the rabble journeys on the busy highway. 
Thus after death are lovers' tombs dishonoured. 
Let me be shadowed by leafy trees in some field far 
from the roadside ; else let me be buried walled in 
by heaps of nameless sand. I would not that my 
name should be recorded amid the bustle of the 
street. 


XVII 

Now, O Bacchus, I cast me down before thine altars 
in lowly supplication ; O father, give me peace and 
prosper my sails. Though Venus be frenzied, thou 
canst quell her scorn, and woes find healing from 
thy wine. By thee are lovers yoked, by thee set 
free ; do thou, O Bacchus, wash this weakness from 
my soul. Thou also art not unversed in love ; to 
that Ariadne rapt heavenward in thy lynx-drawn 
car bears witness among the stars. This curse that 
for many a year hath kept a fire ablaze within 
my bones only death or thy wine shall heal. For 
a sober night is always torment to lonely lovers, 
and hope and fear rack their spirits this way and 
that. 

13 But if, O Bacchus, by thy gifts making my brain 
to burn thou shalt bring sleep to rest my bones, 
then will I sow vines and plant my hills with rows, 
and will watch that no beasts of the wild make 
havoc thereon. If only I may crown my vats with 
purple must and the new grape may dye my feet 
that tread the wine-press, then through all my life 
to come thou and thine horns shall give me life 
and men shall call me the poet of thy virtue, 
O Bacchus. 

21 I will sing how the thunderbolt of Etna's forge 
blasted thy mother and brought thee to the birth, 
how the warriors of Ind were driven in flight by Nysa's 
dancers, how Lycurgus maddened in vain over the 
new-found vine, how Pentheus' death brought joy 
to the three companies of Maenads, how the Tuscan 
sailors, turned to curved dolphin-shapes, leapt into 
the sea from the vine-clad ship, and how fragrant 
streams flowed for thee through Dia's midst and 
the folk of Naxos drank thy wine therefrom. While 
thy white neck bows beneath the trailing ivy-clusters, 
the Lydian turban shall crown thy hair, O Bassareus. 
Thy smooth throat shall stream with scented oil of 
olive, and thy flowing robe shall strike thy naked 
feet. Dircean Thebes shall beat the womanish 
timbrel for thee, and goat-footed Pans shall make 
music on the pipes of reed. Hard by the great 
goddess, Cybelle, her head tower-crowned, shall clash 
the harsh cymbals to the Idaean dance. Before the 
temple gates shall stand the bowl, and the priest 
shall draw wine therefrom with golden ladle and 
pour it on thy sacrifice. 

39 Of all this will I sing, things meet for no lowly 
accent, but with such voice as thundered from the 
lips of Pindar. Do thou only set me free from this 
haughty tyranny and vanquish mine anguished soul 
with slumber. 


XVIII 

Where the sea, shut out from dark -shadowed A vermis, 
beats with its laughing wave on Baiae's warm and 
steaming pools, where Misenus, trumpeter of Troy, lies 
in his sandy tomb, and the way built by the toil of 
Hercules is loud with the sea-billow ; where the 
cymbals clashed in honour of the Theban god, when 
with kindly intent he visited the cities of men — but 
now, ah, hateful Baiae, dark with deep guilt, what 
baleful god stands by your waters? — here he sank 
smitten down to the Stygian wave, and that noble 
spirit wanders o'er your mere. 

11 What availed him birth or virtue or his mother's 
piety ? What availed him his union with the house 
of Caesar, or the waving awnings of the theatre so 
thronged but yesterday, or all that his mother's hands 
had wrought for him ? He is dead, cut short unhappy 
in his twentieth year. Such glory compassed in such 
narrow room ! 

17 Go to now, exalt thy soul with pride and dream 
of triumphs, rejoice when whole theatres spring to 
their feet to cheer, outdo the cloth-of-gold of Attalus, 
at the great games let all be bright with gems ! All 
these glories thou shalt yield up to the fires of death. 
And yet hither at last come all, come noble and come 
base ; bitter is the way, but all must tread it ; all 
must assuage the triple throat of the baying hound, 
and climb the boat of that grim greybeard that waits 
for all. Though a man seek to save himself by 
walls of iron and of brass, yet death shall drag forth 
his head from its sheltering place. Beauty saved 
not Nireus, nor might Achilles; nor was Croesus 
succoured by wealth born of Pactolus stream. 

[ 29 Such grief once wasted the perplexed Achivi, 
when Atrides' new passion cost them dear.] 

31 But to thee, O ferryman of pious souls, let them 
bear this body void of its spirit ; his soul hath soared 
starward far from the paths of men by the road that 
Claudius, victor of Sicily, and Caesar trod. 


XIX 

Oft thou reproachest me with the lust that rules us 
men. Believe me, 'tis rather of your womankind that 
lust is lord. Ye, when ye have burst the reins of 
despised modesty, ne'er set a limit to the frenzy of 
your heart. Sooner shall the flame be quenched 
amid the burning corn, and streams return to the 
fountain whence they sprang, sooner shall the Syrtes 
yield a calm haven and wild Malea give the mariner 
kindly welcome on its shores, than any man shall 
have power to check you in your course or break the 
goads of your headlong wantonness. 

11 Witness be she that suffered the scorn of the 
Cretan bull, and put on the false horns of the
firwood cow. Witness Salmoneus' daughter that burned 
with passion for Thessalian Enipeus, and was ready 
to yield all her body to the watery god. Myrrha too 
is a reproach to your sex, that, fired with love for her 
aged sire, was transformed and hidden in the leaves 
of a strange tree. For why should I tell of Medea, 
when the mother, dearly though she loved her
children, appeased her anger by their slaughter ? Or why 
should I tell of Clytemestra, that in Mycenae brought 
shame on all the house of Pelops by her adultery ? 
And thou, Scylla, that didst sell thyself for the beauty 
of Minos, thou didst shear away thy father's realm 
when thou shorest his purple lock. Such was the 
dower that the maiden pledged to the foe ! Nisus, 
'twas love that opened thy gates by guile. But may 
ye, unwedded maids, burn your marriage torches 
with happier omen : for, see, she hangs to the Cretan 
bark and is dragged through the sea. Yet Minos 
deserves his place as the judge of Hell: though victor 
he showed justice to his conquered foe. 


XX 

Deemst thou that he whom thou hast seen set sail 
from thine embraces can give a thought to the
remembrance of thy beauty ? Cruel the man that had 
the heart to leave his mistress for the sake of gain ! 
When such tears as thine were shed was all Africa 
worth the winning ? But thou, foolish girl, dreamst 
of the gods by whom he swore, and of the light 
words he spake. Perchance e'en now he vexes his 
heart with another passion. 

7 Thy beauty hath power, thine are the chaste arts 
of Pallas, and glorious is the renown shed on thee by 
thy learned grandsire. Rich enough is thine house, 
if thy lover be but true ! I will be true : do thou, my 
love, hasten to my couch ! 

13 The first night of love is come for me. Grant 
me, Moon and Sun, the full space of that first night. 
Moon, linger longer than thy wont o'er our first 
embraces. Thou too, Phoebus, that o'ermuch
prolongst thy summer fires, shorten the course of thy 
laggard light. First must the terms be made, the 
pact be sealed, the contract written, that shall rule 
my new love. Love himself with his own signet 
seals up our troth ; the whirling crown of the starry 
goddess is witness. How many an hour shall first 
yield to my tale of love ere Venus spur us to her 
sweet warfare ! For if Love's bed be not bound by 
compact sure the lover's nights of sleepless watching 
find no gods to avenge them, and lust soon breaks 
the fetters it imposed : but for us may our love's 
first omens keep fast our troth. Wherefore for him 
that breaks the pledge that he swore on heaven's 
altars, and pollutes the rites of wedlock by turning 
to other loves, for him be all the woes love knows 
so well, and let shrill-tongued gossip fasten on him, 
nor, though he weep, may the window of his mistress 
be unbarred to him by night ; let him love without 
ceasing, yet ever lack the fruition of love. 


XXI 

I am constrained to set forth on a mighty journey to 
learned Athens, that long travel may free me from 
the burden of love. For my passion for my mistress 
grows with gazing on her : love itself is love's chief 
nourishment. I have tried all means whereby Love 
may be put to flight : but the god afflicts me from 
every side. Yet scarce ever, or only once and again, 
will she admit me, while oft she says me nay : or 
if she comes to me, she sleeps fully clad on the bed's 
edge. There is no help but this : if I seek another 
lan£, love will fly as far from my soul as Cynthia 
from mine eyes.

11 Come now, my comrades, launch forth our ship to 
sea and draw lots in couples for your turn at the oar. 
Hoist the fair-omened sails to the mast's top ; now 
the breeze forwards the mariner's course across the 
wave. Ye towers of Rome and ye my friends, farewell, 
and thou, my love, whate'er thou hast been for 
me, farewell ! 

17 Now therefore I shall be borne away, the 
Adriatic's unfamiliar guest, and now perforce approach 
with prayer gods of the roaring wave. Then when my 
bark has crossed the Ionian sea and lulled its sails in 
the calm waters of Lechaeum, for what remains of the 
journey hasten, my feet, to endure the toil where 
Isthmos with its fields beats back either sea. Then 
when the shores of Piraeus haven shall receive me I 
will climb the long arms of Theseus' road. There 
I will begin to clear my soul of error in Plato's 
Academe, or in thy gardens, learned Epicurus ; or I 
will pursue the study of eloquence, the weapon of 
Demosthenes, and will cull the wit of thy books, 
learned Menander ; or else bright pictures shall 
delight my eyes, or masterpieces wrought in ivory 
or bronze. 

31 Either length of years or the wide-sundering 
spaces of the deep shall heal the wounds hidden in 
my silent breast, or, if I die, it shall be fate, not
dishonouring love, shall lay me low ; and the day of my 
death shall bring me no disgrace. 


XXII 

Has cool Cyzicus, where the isthmus streams with 
wave of Propontis, and the goddess of Dindymus and 
Cybelle fashioned from carven tusks and the path 
trodden by the steeds of Dis the ravish er, have all 
these pleased thee for so many years, my Tullus ? 
Though perchance the cities of Helle, daughter of 
Athamas, delight thee, yet, Tullus, be moved by my 
longing for thee. 

7 Though one gaze on Atlas supporting all the 
sky, and the head of Phorcys' daughter severed by 
Perseus' hand, the stalls of Geryon, the marks of 
Hercules and Antaeus wrestling in the dust, and 
the dances of the Hesperides ; though another churn 
the waters of Colchian Phasis with his oarsmen and 
follow the whole course of the timbers hewn on 
Pelion, where the pine-tree, wrought into the 
shape of an unfamiliar ship and still strange to the 
sea, glided between the crags with Argos' dove for 
guide ; though he must visit Ortygia and the shores 
of Cayster and the land where Nile's waters run 
in sevenfold channels; yet all these marvels shall 
yield to the land of Rome : here hath nature placed 
whate'er is best in all the world. Tis a land made 
for war rather than crime : Fame blushes not for thy 
story, O Rome. For we are stablished in power by 
loyal faith no less than by the sword : our anger 
restrains its conquering hands. 

23 Here flowest thou, Tiburs Anio, here is Clitumnus
from his Umbrian path and the Marcian conduit 
that shall endure for ever. Here is Alba's lake 
and Nemi thick with leaves, and the healing spring 
whence drank the horse of Pollux. But here glide 
no horned asps with scaly bellies, nor are Italian 
waters wild with strange monsters. Here clang not 
Andromeda's fetters in payment for her mothers 
sin, nor, Phoebus, fliest thou in terror from Ausonian 
banquets ; here for no man's destruction hath burned 
far-distant fire when a mother compassed her own 
son's ruin. No fierce Bacchanals hunt Pentheus in 
his tree, nor are Danaan fleets launched by the 
substitution of a doe. Juno hath had no power to 
make curved horns to grow from her rival's brow 
nor disfigure her features beneath the form of a cow. 
[Here none tell of . . . nor of] the trees where Sinis 
crucified strangers, nor of the rocks that gave bitter 
welcome to the Greeks, nor of the ships built only to 
meet their doom. 

39 This, Tullus, is the land that bore thee, this thy 
fairest home ; here shouldst thou seek honour that 
shall match thy lofty birth. Here are citizens for 
thine eloquence to sway, here is ample hope of 
offspring, and here awaits thee meet love from thy 
bride that shall be. 


XXIII 

So then my tablets, my learned tablets are lost, and 
with them many a gracious writing too is lost. Long 
usage at my hands had worn them down and bade 
them be believed without the warrant of a seal. 
They knew how to appease my loves, though I was 
not by, and, though I was not by, could speak in 
words of eloquence. No golden fittings made them 
precious ; they were only dingy wax on common 
boxwood. Yet poor though they were, they were 
ever faithful to me and ever won deserved success. 
Sometimes, it may be, these were the words entrusted 
to their care : " I am angry, because thou didst tarry 
yestereve, thou sluggard. Didst thou deem thou 
hadst found a fairer love ? Or dost thou spread some 
vile slander against me?" Or perchance she said : 
" Thou wilt come to-day and we will take our ease 
together : Love has made ready a welcome for thee 
all night long." These bare they, and all the shrewd 
words a chattering girl delights to find, when she 
appoints an hour for the stealthy joys of love. Alas ! 
and now some greedy merchant writes his bill upon 
them and places them among his terrible ledgers ! 
If any will return them to me he shall have gold for 
his reward : who would keep hard blocks of wood 
when he might have wealth for them? Go, boy, 
and with all speed set forth these lines upon some 
pillar, and write that thy master dwells upon the 
Esquiline. 


XXIV 

False, woman, is the trust thou puttest in thy 
beauty ; long since the partial judgment of mine 
eyes hath made thee overproud. Such praise of old 
my love bestowed on thee, and now it shames me 
that thou hast glory from my song. Oft did I 
praise the varied beauty of thy blending charms, 
and love deemed thee to be that which thou wert 
not. Oft was thy hue compared to the rosy star of 
dawn, though the splendour of thy face owed naught 
to nature. This madness my father's friends could 
not drive from me, nor any witch of Thessaly wash 
from me with the waves of the wild sea. All this — 
no fire or knife compelling — I confessed in utter 
truth, wrecked on a very ocean of trouble. Venus 
caught me and seethed me in the caldron of her 
cruelty ; my hands were twisted and bound behind 
my back. But lo ! my ships have found haven and 
wear wreaths of thanksgiving, the Syrtes are crossed 
and mine anchor cast. Now at last my senses return 
to me, aweary of the wild sea-tides ; my wounds have 
closed, my flesh is healed. Good Sense, if any such 
goddess there be, I dedicate myself to the service of 
thy shrine, for Jove was deaf and took no heed of all 
my vows. 


XXV 

They made mock of me where the tables were set 
for feasting ; the tongues of the vilest were suffered to 
make free with my name. For five years I had the 
heart to be thy faithful slave ; oft shalt thou gnaw 
thy nails and mourn for my lost loyalty. Tears move 
me not a whit: 'twas tears ensnared me of old : Cynthia, 
thou never weepest save to deceive. I too shall weep 
as I depart, but my wrongs are stronger than grief ; 
for thou lettest not the yoke sit easy on my shoulders. 
Farewell the threshold still weeping with my plaint, 
farewell that door ne'er broken by my hands for all 
its cruelty ! But thee may weary age bow down with 
the years thou hast concealed, and may ill-favoured 
wrinkles come to mar thy beauty ! Then may est 
thou desire to tear out thy white hairs by the root, 
when the mirror mocks thee with thy wrinkles ; 
mayest thou in thy turn be shut out from bliss 
and endure another's haughty scorn ! Turned to 
an ancient crone, mayest thou lament what thou 
hast done ! Such curses fraught with doom are the 
burden of my song for thee : learn to dread the end 
that awaits thy beauty ! 
