I

Ah ! woe is me ! 'twas Cynthia first ensnared me 
with her eyes ; till then my heart had felt no 
passion's fire. But then Love made me lower my 
glance of pride steadfast, and with implanted feet 
bowed down my head, till of his cruelty he taught 
rae to spurn all honest maids, and to live a life of 
recklessness. 

7 A year has passed and my madness is not 
stayed, though my suit perforce endures the frown 
of heaven. Yet Milanion shrank not, Tullus, from 
any toils, howsoe'er hard, and so subdued the cruel 
heart of the unrelenting daughter of Iasus. For 
now he wandered love-distraught in the Parthenian 
caverns, and went to face the shaggy creatures of 
the wild. Nay, more, hard stricken once by the club 
of Hylaeus, he groaned in agony on the rocks of 
Arcady. So at last was he able to conquer the 
swift-footed maid; such is the reward that prayers 
and loyal service win for love. But for me,
slowwitted Love hath lost his craft and forgets to tread 
the paths that once he trod. 

19 But ye who beguile men's hearts by luring the 
moon from heaven, and toil to solemnise dread rites 
on magic altars, go change my mistress' heart and 
make her cheeks grow paler than mine own. Then 
will I trust your claim to have power over stars and 
rivers to lead them whithersoever ye will by Colchian 
charms. 

25 Or else do ye, my friends, that would recall me 
all too late from the downward slope, seek all the 
remedies for a heart diseased. Bravely will I bear 
the cruel cautery and the knife, if only I may win 
liberty to speak the words mine anger prompts. 
Ah ! bear me far thro' nations and seas at the world's 
end, where never a woman may trace my path. Do 
ye abide at home, to whose prayer the god gives easy 
audience and answers " Yea," and either to other 
make equal response of love unperilous. Against me 
Venus, our common mistress, plies nights of
bitterness, and Love that hath no respite faileth never. 

35 Lovers, I warn ye all. Fly the woe that now is 
mine : cling each one to his own beloved, and never 
change when love has found its home. But if any 
all too late give ear to these my warnings, ah ! with 
what agony will he recall my words ! 



II 

What boots it, light of my life, to go forth with 
locks adorned, and to rustle in slender folds of Coan 
silk ? Or avails it aught to steep thy tresses in the 
myrrh of Orontes, to parade thyself in the gifts that 
aliens bring, to spoil the grace of nature by the 
charms that gold can buy nor allow thy limbs to 
shine in the glory that is their own ? Believe me, 
thou hast no art can make thy form more fair ; Love 
himself goes naked and hates those that make a craft 
of beauty. See what hues lovely earth sends forth ; 
'tis the wild ivy springs fairest ever; loveliest the 
arbutus that grows in the caverns of the wilderness, 
and all untaught are the channels where the waters 
run. Begemmed with native pebbles the shores 
beguile our eyes, and birds sing sweetlier from their 
lack of art. 

16 'Twas not by art that Phoebe, Leucippus' child, 
fired the heart of Castor, nor by adornments that 
Hilaira her sister won the love of Pollux. Not so 
did Euenus' daughter become a bride, for whom of 
old Idas and passionate Phoebus strove ; by no false 
brilliance did Hippodamia lure to her side her 
Phrygian spouse, and was whirled away on alien 
chariot- wheels. Unto no jewels their faces were 
beholden, pure as the hues that shine in Apelles' 
pictures. They never craved to gather lovers through 
all the land ; enough for them, if their beauty was 
clothed with chastity. Have I not then good cause 
for fear ? Ah ! count me not cheaper than; those 
vile wretches that seek thy love ! With one true 
lover a maid hath enough of honour ; so most of all, 
if Phoebus grant, as to thee, his boon of song and 
Calliope, nothing loth, bestow Aonia's lyre, and every 
merry word is graced with wondrous charm, even 
by all that Venus and all that Minerva loves. All 
these things shall make thee dearest to my heart, if 
thou wilt but cast aside thy hateful luxury. 


III 

Like as the maid of Cnossus lay swooning on the 
desert strand whilst the bark of Theseus sped swift 
away, or as Andromeda, child of Cepheus, sank into 
her first sleep, freed at last from her hard couch 
of rock, or as the Thracian maenad, no less fore- 
done by the unending dance, lies sunk in slumber 
on the grassy banks of Apidanus, even so,
meseemed, did Cynthia breathe the spirit of gentle 
rest, her head propped on faltering hands, when I 
came dragging home my reeling feet, drunken 
with deep draughts of wine, and the slaves were 
shaking their dying torches in the gloom of night 
far-spent. 

11 Not yet were all my senses drowned, and I strove 
to approach her where she lay, and lightly pressed 
against her couch. And although a twofold frenzy 
had laid hold upon me, and the two inexorable gods 
of wine and love urged on this side and on that, with 
gentle touch I tried to pass mine arm about her where 
she lay, and with outstretched hand take passionate 
toll of kisses ; yet I had not dared to break in upon 
my mistress' rest (for I feared the bitter chidings of 
that cruel tongue, so oft endured by me), but fixed 
my gaze upon her with tireless eyes, even as Argus 
glared on the strange horned brow of the daughter 
of Inachus. And now I loosed the chaplets from my 
brow and placed them, Cynthia, about thy head, and 
now rejoiced to compose thy straying locks ; and 
stealthily with hollowed hands gave thee apples, 
and on thy thankless slumbers lavished every gift, 
gifts poured abundantly from my bosom as I bowed 
above thee. And if at times thou didst move and 
sigh, I started for fear (though vain was the presage 
which won my belief) that visions of the night 
brought thee strange terrors or that some phantom- 
lover constrained thee to be his against thy will. 

31 But at last the moon gliding past the windows 
over against her couch, the officious moon with lingering
light, opened her fast-closed eyes with its gentle 
beams. Then with elbow propped on the soft couch 
she cried : 

35 "At length another's scorn has driven thee 
forth and closed the doors against thee and brought 
thee home to my bed once more. For where hast thou 
passed the long hours of the night, that was plighted 
to me, thou that comest to me outworn when the 
stars — ah, me ! — are driven from the sky ? Mayst 
thou, cruel heart, endure the long agony of nights 
such as ever thou bidst me broken-hearted keep. For 
but now I was beguiling mine eyes from slumber 
with purple broidery, and then, work-wearied, with 
the music of Orpheus' lyre. And ever and anon, left 
thus forlorn, I made gentle moan unto myself, that 
oft thou lingerest locked in another's arms, till at the 
last I sank down and sleep fanned my limbs with 
kindly wings. That was my last thought amid my 
tears." 


IV 

Why, Bassus, by praising the beauty of so many 
fair ones dost thou urge me to change my course 
and leave my mistress ? Why sufferest thou me not 
to spend in her fetters, to which my heart grows ever 
more enured, whate'er of life the future has in store ? 
Thou mayest praise the beauty of Antiopa, the child 
of Nycteus, the charms of Spartan Hermione and all 
the maids the age of beauty bore yet Cynthia would 
make their glory pale ; still less, were she compared 
with meaner beauties, would the harshest judge 
declare her the less fair. Yet even her shapely form 
is but the least part of that which frenzies me. Yet 
greater charms are there, for which, Bassus, to die 
with passion is my joy. A natural colour, grace 
sprung from skill in many an art, and joys whereof 
her couch keeps the secret. 

15 The more thou strivest to dissolve our love, 
the more doth either of us cheat thy craft with
unshaken loyalty. Nor shalt thou go scatheless for 
this; the frenzied maid shall know what thou hast 
done, and by no gentle outcry shall prove thy foe, 
nor will Cynthia henceforth entrust me to thy 
care nor seek thy company; such crime as thine 
she will remember ever, and in her wrath will defame 
thee in every beauty's ear ; henceforth, alas ! no 
threshold shall give thee welcome. No altar shall be 
too humble a witness for her tears, no sacred effigy, 
whate'er its sanctity, shall fail to know her grief. 
No loss touches Cynthia so deeply as when a lover's 
heart is stolen from her and Cupid spreads his wings ; 
deepest of all her grief if 'tis my love she loses. Ah ! 
may she ever, I pray, abide thus, and may I never find 
aught in her to cause me to lament. 



V 

Envious, hush now at length thy unwelcome 
prayers, and let us go hand in hand along the path 
that now we tread. What wouldst thou, madman ? 
Wouldst thou suffer frenzies such as mine? Poor 
wretch, thou hastest to acquaint thyself with the 
worst of ills, to tread on hidden fire to thy sorrow 
and drink all Thessaly's store of poison. Shouldst 
thou compare her, she is not like those flighty loves 
of thine ; her anger is no light thing. Nay, even if 
perchance she frown not wholly on thy prayers, yet 
what a world of care she will bring thee ! No more 
will she suffer thee to sleep nor thine eyes to range at 
will ; she, as none other, can bind the untamed of 
heart. Ah, how often wilt thou run to my doors a 
rejected suitor, when thy brave speech shall fail for 
sobs, and a chill shuddering and bitter weeping shall 
come upon thee, when fear shall trace disfiguring 
lines upon thy face, and the words thou wouldst 
speak die on thy lips in the midst of thy complaining 
and thou canst no more tell, poor wretch, who or 
where thou art ! 

19 Then shalt thou be constrained to learn how 
bitter a thing it is to bear my mistress' yoke, and 
what it means to return homeward when her doors 
are barred. Not any more shalt thou marvel so oft 
at the pallor of my face nor wherefore my whole 
frame is wasted into naught. Nor will thy high 
birth avail thee in thy love : Love scorns to yield 
to ancient ancestry. But if thou givest but the least 
sign of faithlessness, how soon will thy name, so 
powerful now, be a mere byword ! I shall not then 
be able to console thee when thou comest asking 
aid, for mine own woe is cureless ; but we shall be 
constrained, comrades in love and woe, to weep 
tears of sympathy, either on other's breast. Wherefore
cease, Gallus, to seek to learn my Cynthia's 
power. Heavy the toll they pay in answer to whose 
prayer she comes. 


VI 

Tullus, I fear not now to brave the Adrian waves 
with thee nor to spread my sails on the Aegean main ; 
with thee I could scale the Rhipean heights or pass 
beyond the home of Memnon. But the words of my 
mistress as she hangs about my neck, her urgent 
prayers, her changing colour, all keep me back. All 
through the night she shrilly protests her love, and 
laments that she is left forlorn and that the gods are 
vanished out of heaven. Mine though she be, she 
will not yield herself, and uses all those threats 
that an aggrieved mistress will use to an angry 
lover. Not even an hour can I endure to live 
amid such complaints as these ; perish the man 
that dares love unpassionately ! Is it worth my 
while to visit learned Athens or to behold the ancient 
wealth of Asia, that Cynthia may upbraid me when 
my bark is launched and mar her face with passionate 
hands, and cry that she owes kisses to the wind that 
stays my journeying and that there is naught more 
cruel than a faithless lover ? 

19 Do thou strive to outdo thine uncle's well- 
earned rule and restore to the allies their long- 
forgotten rights. For thy youth has never yielded 
to love, and thy care has ever been for thy country's 
arms. Never may the accursed boy lay sorrows such 
as mine on thee, nor all the torments that my tears 
know well ! Let me, whom Fortune hath ever willed 
to lie prostrate, yield up my life obedient to the 
worst her Wantonness can demand. Many have 
gladly perished in gyves of love, that they have 
borne so long, and, when earth laps me round, let 
me be one of these. Nature has not fitted me for 
glory or for arms; Love's is the only warfare for 
which the Fates design me. 

31 But thou, whether thy steps be cast where soft 
Ionia spreads its shores, or where Pactolus' stream 
steeps Lydia's ploughlands, whether thou rangest 
the land on foot or goest forth to lash the sea with 
oars, and makest one of those that rule and are loved 
by them they rule — then shalt thou be sure, if e'er a 
moment comes with memories of me, that I still live 
beneath a baleful star. 


VII 

Whilst thou singest, Ponticus, of Cadmean Thebes, 
and the bitter warfare of fraternal strife, and — so may 
heaven smile on me, as I speak truth — dost rival 
Homer for crown of song (if only the Fates be kind 
to thy verse), I, as is my wont, still ply my loves, 
and seek for some device to o'ercome my mistress' 
cruelty. I am constrained rather to serve my sorrow 
than my wit and to bemoan the hardship that my 
youth endures. 

9 Thus is my whole life passed: this is my 
glory : this is the title to fame I claim for my song. 
Let my only praise be this, that I pleased the heart 
of a learned maid, and oft endured her unjust 
threatenings. Henceforth let neglected lovers read 
diligently my words, and let it profit them to learn 
what woes were mine. Thou too, should the boy 
strike thee with unerring shaft — but may the gods I 
serve ordain thee other doom — shalt weep in misery 
that thy seven leaguered hosts are cast aside and lie 
dumb in everlasting neglect, and in vain shalt thou 
desire to write soft songs of passion ; Love come so 
late shall ne'er inspire thy song. 

21 Then shalt thou marvel at me as no mean 
singer; then shalt thou rank me above the bards 
of Rome ; and youths perforce will cry above my 
tomb : " Mighty singer of our passion, dost thou lie 
so low ?" Beware then lest in thy pride thou spurn 
my song. Love that comes late oft claims a heavy 
toll. 



VIII 

Art thou then mad ? Does no care for me stay thy 
going ? Am I of less account to thee than chill Illyria P 
And esteemest thou that wretch, whoe'er he be, so 
highly that thou art ready to leave me and fly to his 
arms on any wind that blows t Canst thou bear 
unmoved the roar of the raging deep? canst thou 
make thy couch on the hard ship's-bench ? or press 
with tender feet the fallen hoar-frost ? or endure, 
my Cynthia, the unfamiliar snows ? Ah, would that 
the wintry season's storms were doubled, and the 
Pleiads' rising delayed, that the sailor might tarry 
idle and the cables ne'er be loosed from the Tyrrhene 
strand nor the cruel breeze make light of my prayers 
to thee ; and yet may I never see such winds subside, 
when thy bark puts out to sea and the wave bears it 
afar, leaving me rooted on the shore, shaking clenched 
hands and crying out upon thy cruelty. 

17 Yet, faithless one, whate'er thou deserve of me, 
may Galatea smile upon thy path. Pass the Ceraunian
cliffs with prosperous oarage and may Oricos 
at last receive thee in its calm haven. For never 
shall the love of any maid lure me from uttering at 
thy threshold my bitter complaint against thee, light 
of my life ; nor will I cease to question the mariners 
as they hurry by : " Tell me in what port has my 
love found shelter?" and I will cry : "Though she 
abide on Artacia's shores, or where the Hylaei 
dwell, yet shall she be mine ! " 



VIIIa 

She never went ! She has sworn and she remains ! 
Let those that wish me ill burst for envy ! We have 
conquered ! She turned a deaf ear to his persistent 
prayer ! Now let their greedy jealousy lay aside its 
joy ! My Cynthia has ceased to tread new paths 
and strange. She loves me, and for my sake loves 
she Rome most of cities, and cries : " Apart from thee 
a kingdom were not sweet." She has preferred to lie 
in my embrace, though the couch be poor and narrow, 
and to be mine, whate'er the cost, rather than enjoy 
the ancient realm that was Hippodamia's dower and 
all the wealth that Elis won by its steeds. Great 
though his gifts were and greater his promises, avarice 
could not tempt her from my bosom. Not by gold 
nor by the pearls of Ind did I prevail to win her, 
but by the homage of beguiling song. The Muses 
then are maids of might and Apollo is not slow to 
aid a lover ; trusting in their help I pursue my love ; 
and peerless Cynthia is my own. Now is it mine to 
set my feet upon the highest stars of heaven ; come 
night or day, she is mine own ; no rival now shall 
steal my love ; 'tis fixed and sure. The glory of 
to-day shall crown my head when white with eld. 



IX 

Mocker, I ever told thee love would find thee out 
and that thou shouldest not alway be free to speak 
thy thoughts. Lo! now thou liest low, and goest 
suppliant at a woman's will, and now some unknown 
girl, bought by thy gold but yesterday, lords it over 
thee. Not Chaonia's doves could better divine 
than I what youths each maiden shall enslave. 
Sorrow and tears of mine own have given me a just 
claim to skill. Ah ! would that I could lay aside my 
love and once more be called a novice ! What now 
avails it, poor wretch, to chant thy serious song and to 
bewail the walls raised by Amphion's lyre ? Far more 
than Homer avails Mimnermus in the realm of love. 
Smooth are the songs that peaceful love demands. 

13 Go to, prithee, and lay aside thy gloomy books 
and sing what every maid would wish to hear. What if 
thou hadst not easy access ? Madman, thou seekest 
for water when plunged in love's mid-stream. Not 
even yet art thou pale, not yet art thou touched by 
love's true fire : 'tis but the first faint spark of the 
coming woe. Then hadst thou rather approach 
Armenian tigers, or know the chains that bind unto 
the wheels of Hell, than feel so oft the arrows of 
the boy about thy heartstrings, and be powerless to 
refuse aught that thy angry mistress may demand. 
To none doth any Love grant freest flight, but ever 
curbs his wings with tantalising hand. Nor be thou 
deceived if she is wholly at thy command ; possess 
her, Ponticus, and straightway she steals with keener 
passion on thy soul. For then thou may est not turn 
thine eyes where fancy guides; Love permits thee 
not to watch in any cause but hers, Love that lies 
hid until his hand hath pierced thee to the bone. 

30 Whoe'er thou art, flee from the charms that urge 
their suit. To them hard flints and heart of oak 
might yield ; much more must thou, frail breath of 
air that thou art. Wherefore if thou feelest aught 
of shame, at once confess thine error. Often in love 
'twill bring relief to tell what passion wastes thy 
soul. 



X 

O sweet repose, when I was witness of your first 
hour of love, and stood by you as you wept together. 
Ah ! what sweet joy to recall that night to memory ! 
Ah ! night so oft to be invoked by my prayers, 
whereon I saw thee, Gallus, languish in thy
mistress' arms, and speak love's words amid long-drawn 
silences ! Though sleep weighed down my wearied 
eyes and the glowing moon drove her team in mid- 
heaven, yet could I not leave the sight of your tender 
dalliance, such passion rang in the words ye
interchanged. 

11 But since thou hast not feared to yield the secret 
of thy love to me, take thy reward for the joys thou 
didst confide. Not only have I learnt to say naught of 
your sorrows ; there is in me something yet better than 
loyal secrecy. I can join parted lovers, and unbar a 
mistress' reluctant doors ; I too can heal another's 
fresh-smarting griefs ; not slight is the remedy my 
words can bring. Cynthia has ever taught me what 
things each lover should seek, and what should shun. 
Love has wrought something for me. 

21 See that thou seek not to resist thy mistress 
when she frowns, nor to speak proudly nor be silent 
long ; nor, should she ask thee aught, do thou refuse 
it with frowning brow, nor let words of kindness 
fall on thy ears in vain. Spurn her and she comes in 
wrath to thee ; offend her, and she ne'er remembers 
to lay aside her just threats. But the more thou 
humblest thyself and yieldest to her love, the more 
oft thou shalt enjoy the crown of thy desires. He 
will be able to abide in the enjoyment of one mistress' 
love who never claims his freedom nor lets her image 
vanish from his heart. 


XI 

Cynthia, while thou tak'st thine ease in Baiae's midst, 
where the causeway built by Hercules lies stretched 
along the shore, and now marvellest at the waves 
that wash Thesprotus' realm, now at those that 
spread hard by renowned Misenum, dost thou ever 
think that I, alas ! pass weary nights haunted by 
memories of thee ? Hast thou room for me even in the 
outer borders of thy love? Has some enemy with 
empty show of passion stolen thee away from thy 
place in my songs ? Would rather that some little 
boat, trusting in tiny oars, kept thee safe on the 
Lucrine lake, or that the waters yielding with 
ease to the swimmer's either hand held thee
retired by the shallow waves of Teuthras, than that 
thou shouldst listen at ease to the fond murmurs 
of another as thou liest soft reclined on the 
silent strand ; for when there is none to watch her 
a maid will break her troth and go astray,
remembering not the gods of mutual love. Not that I 
doubt thee, for I know that thy virtue is well tried, 
but at Baiae all love's advances give cause for fear 
Pardon me, therefore, if my books have brought thee 
aught of bitterness ; lay all the blame upon my fear. 
For I watch not over my beloved mother more
tenderly than over thee, nor without thee would life be 
worth a thought. 

23 Thou only, Cynthia, art my home, thou only 
my parents, thou art each moment of my joy. 
Be I gay or grave to the friends I meet, whate'er 
my mood, I will say : " Cynthia was the cause." Only 
do thou with all speed leave the lewd life of Baiae; 
to many a loving pair shall those shores bring
severance, shores that have aye proved ill for modest 
maids. Perish the Baian waters, that bring reproach 
on love ! 


XII 

Why, Rome, thou witness of my love, ceasest thou 
never to tax me falsely with sloth, saying 'tis sloth 
delays my suit ? She is parted from my bed by as 
many leagues as Hypanis is distant from Venetian 
Eridanus. No more does Cynthia feed my wonted 
love with her embraces, no longer does her name make 
music to my ear. Once I pleased her well : then there 
was none so happy as to love with such true return of 
devotion. But envy marked us down. Was it a god 
that overwhelmed me, or some magic herb gathered 
on Promethean hills for the sundering of lovers ? 

11 I am not what I was. A distant journey can 
change a woman's heart ! How mighty was that love, 
and in how brief a space 'tis fled Now for the first 
time am I forced to face the long, long hours of night 
alone and to vex mine own ears with my complaining. 
Happy the man who can weep before his mistress' 
eyes ; Love has great delight in flooding tears. Or 
if, once spurned, he hath had power to change his
passion, even in change of bondage is there joy. But I 
may never love another, nor part from her. Cynthia 
was the beginning, Cynthia shall be the end. 


XIII 

Thou, Gallus, as thou oft art wont, wilt rejoice at my 
misfortunes, because my love has been snatched from 
me and I am left lonely and forlorn. But, faithless 
friend, I will never imitate thy taunts. May never 
fair one have the heart to play thee false. Even now 
while thy fame for the loves thou hast beguiled 
increases ever, and self-possessed thou cleavest ne'er 
for long to one passion, even now late in time 
thou beginnest to pale with woe, love-frenzied for 
one girl, and to retire baffled at the first step of 
thy advance. This shall be thy punishment for thy 
scorn of their sorrows; one girl shall avenge the 
wrongs of many, she shall stay thy ranging loves, 
nor shall thy search for novelty always win thee a 
welcome. 

13 No spiteful rumour, no soothsayer tells me this ; 
I saw thy love — darest thou deny the truth to me 
whose eyes were witness ? I saw thee languish with 
her arms fast about thy neck, I saw thee weep lapped in 
a long embrace, and yearn to breathe forth thy soul in 
the words of desire ; and last, my friend, I saw, what 
shame bids me hide. I could not part your embraces, 
such a wild frenzy bound you each to each. Not with 
such passion did the Taenarian god, made one with 
Haemonian Enipeus, embrace Salmoneus' child, the 
willing victim of his love. Hercules burned not with 
such love for divine Hebe, when on Oeta's heights he 
tasted the first joys of godhead. One day surpassed 
the joys of all past lovers ; for no faint torch she 
kindled in thy veins. She suffered not thine old 
pride to come o'er thee once again, nor will she let 
thee be taken from her. Thy passion shall drive thee 
on and always on. 

29 Nor can I marvel since she is worthy Jove,
surpassed by Leda only, and fairer herself alone than all 
three children of Leda. More winsome would she 
prove than all Inachia's queens ; by her sweet words 
would she force even Jove to love her. Since then in 
truth thou art doomed once and for all to die of love, 
use thy chance : thou wert worthy to besiege no other 
doors than hers. Since madness to which thou art a 
stranger has seized thee, may she be kind ; and may 
she and she alone be all thy heart's desire. 


XIV 

Though reclining idly by Tiber's wave thou quaffest 
Lesbian wine from cups chased by the hand of Mentor, 
and marvellest now how swiftly the boats run by 
and now how slowly the towed barges go : though all 
the woodland round thee spreads its growth of trees 
along the hill-crest, huge as the forest that weighs 
upon slopes of Caucasus, yet all these things could 
not vie with my love ; Love will not yield to all the 
might of wealth. 

9 For if Cynthia lies with me by night in long- 
desired rest, or spends the day in kindly love, then the 
waters of Pactolus bring their wealth beneath my roof, 
and the Red Sea's gems are gathered for my delight ; 
then does my joy assure me that kings must yield to 
me. And may these joys abide with me till Fate decrees 
my death. For who may have joy of wealth if Love 
be not kind ? Ne'er be the prize of riches mine if 
Venus frown ! She can bow down the puissant might 
of heroes, she can bring sorrow to the hardest heart. 
She fears not to o'erpass the threshold of Arabian 
onyx, she shrinks not, Tullus, to climb into the purple 
couch, and toss the hapless youth in unrest o'er all 
his bed. What avail the silken hangings with their 
weft of varied hue ? Ah ! while she is kind and aids 
me in my love I will not fear to scorn the realms 
of any monarch, nor gifts such as Alcinous might 
give. 


XV 

Oft have I dreaded much hardship from thy fickleness,
yet never, Cynthia, treachery such as this. 
See into what perils fortune plunges me ! Yet still 
thou art slow to succour my distress, and hast the 
heart to raise thine hands to array the yesternight's 
disorder of thy tresses, to adorn thy face with lingering
care, and all unmoved to bestar thy breast with 
Eastern gems, like some fair maid that goes to meet 
her bridegroom. 

• Not so was Calypso moved when the Ithacan left 
her and she wept of yore to the lonely waste of 
waves : many a long day she sat moaning his loss, 
her locks unkempt, and many a plaint she uttered to 
the cruel sea : and though she never more should see 
his face, she grieved remembering their long hours 
of happiness. Not so as the breeze bore afar the 
son of Aeson did Hypsipyle stand sorrow-laden in 
the empty nuptial chamber; Hypsipyle tasted of 
love no more, since once she pined for her lost 
Haemonian guest. Alphesiboea took vengeance on 
her own brothers for her husband's sake, and love 
brake the bonds of kindred blood. Evadne, glory of 
Argive chastity, perished in the fatal flame and shared 
her husband's pyre. 

28 Yet none of these has prevailed on thee to change 
thy fashion of life, that thou too might'st become a 
glorious memory. Cease at length by thy words to 
recall thy past faithlessness, nor provoke the gods 
thou hast so long forgotten. Rash girl, ah ! deep, 
too deep will be thy sorrow for my peril, if aught 
of woe chance to fall on thee. Ere that shall many 
marvels be : rivers shall flow upward from the wild 
sea, and the year reverse its seasons, ere my love 
for thee shall alter in my breast : be what thou wilt, 
yet not another's own. Let not those eyes of thine 
seem of so little worth to thee, those eyes that oft 
made me believe thy falsehoods true ! By them 
thou swarest, praying that if in aught thou hadst 
played me false thine own hands might pluck them 
forth. And canst thou raise them to the mighty 
sun and tremble not when thou rememberest thy 
guilty wantonings ? Who made thee pale with many 
a shifting hue, and forced thine eyes to weep
unwilling tears ? — those eyes for whose sake I die with 
passion, thus to warn lovers in like plight to mine, 
"There's never witchery of woman that man may 
safely trust." 


XVI 

I that of old was flung wide to welcome mighty 
triumphs, Tarpeia's portal glorified by her chastity, 
whose threshold gilded chariots once made renowned 
and the suppliant tears of captives once bedewed, I 
to-day am bruised by the nightly brawls of drunkards, 
and smitten by unworthy hands make moan.
Dishonouring wreaths fail not to hang by me, and ever 
nigh me lie torches that tell their tale to lovers shut 
out from bliss. 

9 Yet cannot I save my mistress from her nights of 
shame, but, once so noble, am now the prey of ribald 
rhymes. Nor yet is she moved to repent and have 
pity on her fair fame, and to cease from living more 
vilely than the vileness of a wanton age. And even 
while thus I make my moan, yet bitterer tears are 
mine to weep, as the long watches of the suppliant 
lover deepen my woe. He suffers never my pillars 
to have peace, with shrill blandishment chanting this 
refrain : 

17 "Door yet more deeply cruel than even my 
mistress' heart, why are thy grim portals ever closed 
and mute for me ? Why never dost thou unbar and 
give entrance to my love, thou that knowest not to 
relent and bear my secret prayers to my mistress ? Wilt 
thou never grant an ending to my woes ? And must a 
doleful sleep be mine on thy chill threshold ? For me 
the midnight and the stars that turn to their setting 
and the breeze laden with chill frost of dawn grieve 
as they behold me prostrate. Thou alone pitiest 
never the agony of the heart of men ; thy hinges are 
silent, and thou answerest naught. Would that some 
whisper of my voice might pass through some hollow 
rift in thee, and fall upon my mistress' startled ear ! 
Then were she more stubborn than flint or Etna's 
crags, more cruel than iron or steel, yet will she not 
have power to control her eyes, and mid unwilling 
tears a sigh shall rise. 

83 " Now she lies propped on another's happy arm 
and my words fall idly on the breezes of the night. 
But thou art the sole, the chiefest cause of my 
grief, unvanquished ever by the gifts I bring. My 
tongue hath never assailed thee with angry drunken 
jest, so dear to froward anger, that thou shouldst 
suffer me to grow hoarse with long complaining 
and watch all night at the crossways in anguished 
waiting. But oft for thee have I spun new strains 
of song and bowed me to print clinging kisses on 
thy steps. How oft have I turned my back upon 
thy pillars and with furtive hands bestowed the 
votive gifts that were thy due." 

46 So cries he with aught else that ye, hapless 
lovers, have learned to cry, and outclamours the 
birds of dawn. So by my mistress' vices and her 
lover's tears am I for aye defamed with ever-during 
scorn. 


XVII 

Deservedly, since I have had the heart to fly from 
my mistress, do I now cry to the lonely sea-mews, 
nor shall Cassiope give her wonted welcome to my 
bark, and all my prayers fall idly on a heartless 
shore. Nay, more, though thou art far away the 
winds but aid thy cruelty : lo ! what fierce threats 
the gale howls in my ear ! Will Fortune never 
come to still the tempest? Shall yonder scanty 
sands hide my bones ? 

9 Yet do thou but change thy savage complaints 
to kinder tones ; let the dark night and threatening 
shoals be in thine eyes enough punishment for me. 
Wilt have the heart dry-eyed to demand my death 
and ne'er to hold mine ashes to thy bosom ? Perish 
the man, whoe'er he was, that first devised ships 
and sails, and first voyaged over the unwilling deep ! 
Easier task had it been to overcome my mistress' heart 
— cruel was she, yet peerless among women ! — than 
thus to gaze on shores fringed with unknown forests 
and seek in vain for the desired sons of Tyndareus. 

19 If some doom had buried all my grief at home, 
if there my love had ended and at the last the headstone
marked its close, then would she have cast those 
locks I loved so well upon my pyre, and have laid 
my bones on a soft couch of delicate rose-leaves : she 
would have cried my name aloud over my last ashes, 
praying that earth might lie light upon me. 

26 But do ye, O sea-born daughters of lovely 
Doris, give prosperous escort and unfurl our white 
sails : if ever love has glided down and touched your 
waves, spare a fellow-bondsman and guide him to a 
kindly shore. 


XVIII 

Here of a truth is a lonely and a silent place, where 
I may make my moan, and the breath of the West 
Wind only rules this deserted grove. Here may I 
freely utter my secret griefs, if only these lone crags 
can keep faith. 

6 From what first beginning, Cynthia, shall I trace 
thy scorn ? What was the first cause for tears thou 
gavest me? I that but a short while since was 
counted among happy lovers, am now perforce an 
outcast from thy love. What woe such as this have 
I deserved ? what spells alter thy love for me ? Is 
jealousy of some new rival the cause of thine anger ? 
So surely mayst thou return to my embrace, fickle 
maid, as no other woman has ever planted her fair 
feet within my threshold. Though my grief owes 
thee much bitterness, yet never shall my wrath fall 
so fierce upon thee, that I should always give thee 
just cause for fury and thine eyes be marred with 
streaming tears, 

17 Or is it that I give scant proof of my passion by 
changing colour, and that no token of my faith cries 
aloud upon my countenance ? Ye shall be my
witnesses, if trees know aught of love, beech-tree and 
pine, beloved of Arcady's god. Ah ! how oft do my 
passionate words echo beneath your delicate shades, 
how oft is Cynthia's name carved upon your bark ! 

28 Ah ! how oft has thy injustice begotten troubles 
in my heart, that only thy silent portal knows ! I 
have been wont to bear thy haughty commands with 
patience, nor ever to bemoan my grief in piercing 
accents of sorrow. Yet in return for this, ye founts 
divine, lo! this chill couch of rock is mine and 
broken slumbers on this rugged track : and all that 
my plaintive cries can tell must be uttered in this 
waste place to shrill-voiced birds. 

31 But be what thou wilt, still let the woods re-echo 
" Cynthia/' nor these lone crags have rest from the 
sound of thy name 


XIX 

No more now, my Cynthia, fear I the sad world of 
death ; I care not for the doom that at the last must 
feed the fires of funeral ; this fear alone is bitterer 
than death itself, that I should go down to the grave 
unloved by thee. Not with such light touch has 
Love cleaved to mine eyes that my dust should 
forget thee and lie loveless. Even in the dark 
underworld the hero son of Phylacus could not
forget his sweet wife, but, yearning to enfold his dear 
one with phantom hands, the Thessalian returned in 
ghostly wise to his ancient home. There, whatsoe'er 
I be, as Cynthia's lover shall my shade be known ; 
strong love o'erpasses even the shores of doom. 
There let the fair queens of old, whom the spoils of 
Troy gave to Argive husbands, come in a troop to 
greet me ! Yet the beauty of none of these shall 
please me more than thine, and though the doom of 
old age delay thy coming long — may earth be kind 
and grant this boon! — yet shall the sight of thine 
ashes be dear to my weeping eyes: and like love 
long mayst thou that livest feel, when I am dust; 
then wheresoe'er death find me, it shall have lost its 
sting. Yet, Cynthia, I have a fear that thou mayst 
spurn my tomb, and some cruel passion part thee 
from my dust, and force thee, though loth, to dry 
thy falling tears. Continued threats may bend the 
will even of a loyal maid. Wherefore, while yet 
may be, let us love and be merry together. Eternity 
itself is all too brief for love. 


XX 

Take this my warning, Gallus, in return for thine 
unfailing love : let it not slip from thy thoughtless 
mind : " Fortune oft proves adverse to the heedless 
lover"; so might Ascanius tell thee, that wreaked 
his spite upon the Minyae. 

6 Thou hast a love most like to Hylas, child 
of Theodamas, one not less fair nor of humbler 
birth. Beware then, whether thou wanderest by the 
holy streams of Umbrian forests, or Anio's waters 
lave thy feet, or walk'st thou on the marge of the 
Giant's strand, or wheresoe'er a river's wandering 
waters welcome thee, beware and from thy love ward 
off the hands of nymphs that burn to steal (the 
Ausonian Dryads love as warmly as their sisters 
loved), lest it be thy fate ever to visit cruel mountain 
and icy crag and lakes, that thou hast tried to thy cost. 
Such woes the ill-starred wanderer Hercules suffered 
in a far land and bewailed by the shores of the 
relentless Ascanius, For they say that of old Argos 
set sail from the dockyards of Pagasa and went forth 
on the long way to Phasis, and at last, the waves of 
Helle past, moored his bark on Mysia's rockbound 
coast. Here the band of heroes went forth upon the 
peaceful shore and carpeted the ground with a soft 
coverlet of leaves. But the comrade of the young 
un vanquished hero ranged afar to seek the scarce 
waters of some distant spring. Him the two brothers 
followed, Zetes and Calais, the North Wind's sons, 
and, bowing o'er him, both pressed on to embrace 
him with hovering hands and snatch a kiss and bear 
it from his upturned face, each as in turn they fled. 
But the boy, swept off his feet, hides clinging to one 
by his pinion's base, and with a branch wards off 
the others winged wiles. At last the children of 
Orithyia, Pandion's daughter, retired discomfited, 
and Hylas, alas went upon his way, went to be 
the wood-nymphs' prey. 

83 Here beneath the peak of Arganthus' mount 
lay the well of Pege, the watery haunt so dear to 
Bithynia's nymphs, o'er which from lonely trees 
there hung dewy apples that owed naught to the 
hand of man, and round about in a water-meadow 
sprang snowy lilies mingled with purple poppies. 
And there, in boyish delight, he gently plucked them 
with soft finger-tips, preferring the flowers to his 
chosen task ; and now in artless wonder bent over the 
fair waters and prolonged his truancy with gazing at 
their mirrored charms. At length he made ready to 
stretch forth his hands to the waves and draw water 
therefrom, leaning on his right shoulder and raising 
a plenteous draught. But, smitten with passion at 
the sight of that snowy shoulder, the Hamadryads 
in wonder ceased their wonted dance. Easily from 
where he lay reclined they dragged him through the 
yielding flood. Then Hylas as they seized his body 
uttered a cry, whereto in answer Alcides shouted 
again, again, and yet again ; but the breezes bore him 
back from the fountain's edge naught save the echo 
of the name. 

51 Warned by this tale, my Gallus, thou shalt keep 
thy love secure, thou that aforetime didst seem to 
entrust thy Hylas to the nymphs. 


XXI 

"Soldier, that hastenest to escape thy comrades 
doom, flying wounded from the Etruscan ramparts, 
and turnest thy swollen eyes at the sound of my
moaning, I am one of thy nearest comrades in arms. So save 
thyself, that thy parents may rejoice over thy safety, 
nor thy sister learn my fate from the silent witness 
of thy tears ; how Gallus, though he escaped through 
the midst of Caesar's swordsmen, yet could not escape 
the hand of some unknown spoiler ; and whatever 
bones she may find scattered on the mountains of 
Tuscany, let her not know them to be mine." 


XXII 

Tullus, thou askest ever in our friendship's name, 
what is my rank, whence my descent, and where 
my home. If thou knowest our country's graves at 
Perusia, the scene of death in the dark hours of 
Italy, when civil discord maddened the citizens 
of Rome (hence, dust of Tuscany, art thou my 
bitterest sorrow, for thou hast borne the limbs 
of my comrade that were cast out unburied, thou 
shroudest his ill-starred corpse with never a dole of 
earth), know then that where Umbria, rich in fertile 
lands, joins the wide plain that lies below, there 
was I born. 
