I 

All that thou beholdest, stranger, where mighty 
Rome lies spread, was grass and hill before the 
coming of Phrygian Aeneas ; and where stands the 
Palatine sacred to Phoebus of the Ships, there once lay 
the herd of Evander's exiled kine. From gods of clay 
sprang yonder golden temples ; of old they spurned 
not to dwell in huts made by unskilled hands ; the 
Tarpeian sire thundered from a bare crag, and Tiber 
still seemed strange to our cattle. Where Remus' 
house is perched yonder at the stairway's height 
the brothers of old counted their tiny hearth a 
mighty realm. The Senate-house, that towers on 
high filled with a shining throng of senators clad in 
the robe with purple hem, once held a rustic
company, the city fathers robed in skins of beasts. The 
trumpet summoned the olden Quirites to debate : a 
hundred gathered in a meadow oft made a senate. 
No rippling awnings hung o'er the hollow theatre, 
nor reeked the stage with saffron, as 'tis wont to-day. 
Then no man sought to bring in strange gods, when 
the folk trembled in suspense before the ritual of 
their sires; but greatly they cared to celebrate 
the yearly feast of Pales with heaps of burning 
straw, making purification such as to-day we make 
with the blood of the maimed horse. Vesta was 
poor, and necklaced asses sufficed to make her glad, 
while lean kine dragged sacred emblems of little 
worth. The cross-roads, small as yet, were sprinkled 
with the blood of fatted swine, and the shepherd to 
the sound of pipes of reed made acceptable sacrifice 
with the entrails of sheep. The ploughman girt 
with skins plied his shaggy scourge ; hence spring 
the rites of Fabian Lupercus. Their rude soldiers 
flashed not in threatening armour, but joined battle 
bare-breasted with stakes hardened in the fire. 
Lycmon wore but a wolf-skin helm when he pitched 
the first of general's tents, and the wealth of Tatius 
lay chiefly in his sheep. Thus rose the Titienses, 
the hero Ramnes, and the Luceres of Solonium ; thus 
came it that Romulus drove the four white steeds of 
triumph. Of a truth Bovillae was less a suburb 
while Rome was yet so small, and Gabii, that now is 
naught, was then a crowded town. Then Alba, born 
of the white sow's omen, still stood in power, in the 
days when 'twas a long journey from Rome to Fidenae. 
The Roman of to-day has naught from his father 
save the name, nor would he deem that the she-wolf 
nurtured the blood from whence he sprang. 

39 Hither, O Troy, for happier destiny didst thou 
send thine exiled gods ; with blessed augury came 
hither the Dardan bark ; even then the omens boded 
her well, since the womb of the horse of fir-wood had 
done her no hurt in that day when the father hung 
trembling on his son's neck, and the flame feared to 
burn those pious shoulders. That day led hither 
the dauntless Decii and the consulship of Brutus, 
and Venus herself bore hither her Caesar's arms, 
even the victorious arms of Troy reborn; with 
blessing, lulus, did the land receive thy gods, since 
the tripod of Avernus' trembling Sibyl bade Remus 
sanctify the fields of Aventine, and late in time the 
strains of the prophetess of Troy proved true
concerning ancient Priam. "Turn your steeds, ye 
Danaans ! " she cried. " Ye conquer but in vain I 
Ilium's land shall live and Jove shall arm her 
ashes ! " 

65 O wolf of Mars, thou best of nurses for our state, 
what walls have sprung from thy milk ! Of those 
walls let me sing in order due — alas ! how weak 
is the voice of my lips. Yet howsoever slender the 
stream of song that flows from my puny heart, yet all 
of it shall be given to the service of my country. 
Let Ennius crown his songs with rude, shaggy 
wreath ! To me, O Bacchus, give of thine ivy's 
leaves, that my books may make Umbria swell with 
pride, Umbria the home of Rome's Callimachus ! 
Let him that sees the towers of A sis climbing from 
the vale reckon the glory of its walls by the fame of 
my wit ! Rome, smile on me ! For thee my work 
is built. Ye citizens, give me fair omen, and from 
the right hand let some bird of augury sing me
success. I will cry, "Troy, thou shalt fall, and thou, 
Trojan Rome, shalt arise anew ! " and I will sing of 
all Rome's long perils by land and sea. Of holy 
rites and their days will I sing, and of the ancient 
names of places. This must be the goal toward which 
my foaming steed shall press. 

Ia

Whither in heedless folly dost thou speed to sing 
the works of destiny, thou truant Propertius ? The 
thread thou spinnest comes from no favouring distaff. 
Thy song shall bring thee sorrow; Apollo's face is 
turned from thee ; thou askest of thine unwilling 
lyre such strains as thou shalt rue. I will tell thee 
sure truth with warrant sure ; else am I a seer that 
knows not how to wheel the constellations on their 
orb of bronze. Horos is my name, and Babylonian 
Orops, child of Archytas, begat me, and my house 
hath Conon for ancestor. The gods be witness that 
I have not shamed my kin and that in my books 
there is naught set down save truth. Now have 
men turned the gods to profit and Jupiter is fooled 
by their gold ; to profit have they turned the oft- 
scanned constellations of the slanting zodiac, the 
blessed star of Jove, the greedy star of Mars, the 
sign of Saturn that brings woe to one and all, the 
purport of the Fish and the fierce constellation of 
the Lion and Capricorn, bathed in the waters of the 
West. 

89 When Arria was in travail with her twin sons I 
foretold — for she destined her sons for arms, though 
a god forbade — that they should never bring home 
their spears to the gods of their father's home, and 
now lo ! two tombs prove that my words were true. 
For the horseman Lupercus, as he shielded his 
wounded face, guarded himself but ill, alas ! for 
his steed had fallen : while Gall us, as in the camp 
he defended the standards entrusted to his charge, 
fell dead before his eagle's beak and bathed it in his 
blood. Doomed boys, both brought to your death 
by your mother's greed, my words found true fulfilment — 
ah ! would that they had not ! I, too, when 
Lucina prolonged Cinara's pains, and the slow burden 
of her womb delayed, cried : " Let her make a vow to 
Juno that shall win the ear of the goddess ! " She 
was delivered : my books won the day. Such 
truth is not unfolded by the cave of Libyan Jove 
amid the desert sands, nor by entrails that speak 
forth the will of heaven entrusted to their care ; 
such truth he cannot tell that marks the crow's 
beating wings, nor the spirit of the dead that rises 
from magic waters. The seer must gaze upon 
the path of heaven, on the road of truth that 
lies among the stars, and from the five zones seek 
assurance. Calchas bears grievous witness; for 
he loosed from Aulis the ships that clung to the 
kindly rocks, as still they should have clung ; 'twas 
Calchas, too, that embrued the steel in the blood of 
Agamemnon's daughter and launched Atrides with 
blood upon his sails; yet never did the Danaans 
return ; fallen Troy, check thy weeping and behold 
Euboea's bays ! Nauplius uplifts his vengeful fires 
by night, and Greece swims sunken by the weight of 
her own spoils. Victorious son of Oileus, go, ravish 
thy prophetess and take her to thy love, though 
Minerva forbid thee to tear her from her robe ! 

119 Thus far shall history witness ; now to thy 
stars I turn; prepare to lend patient hearing to a 
new tale of tears. Ancient Umbria bore thee in a 
home of high renown — do I lie ? or do I touch thy 
country's borders? — where misty Mevania sheds its 
dews on the hollow plain and the waters of Umbria's 
lake send forth their summer steam, and the wall 
rises from the peak of climbing Asis, that wall made 
yet more glorious by thy wit. And all too young 
thou didst gather to thy bosom thy father's bones 
and wert driven to a poorer home. Many were the 
steers that tilled thy fields, but the pitiless measuring-
rod robbed thee of thy wealth of plough-land. 
Thereafter when the ball of gold was cast from thy 
young neck and the robe of manhood's freedom was 
donned before thy mother's gods, then did Apollo 
teach thee some little of his song and forbid thee to 
thunder forth thy speech in the mad tumult of the 
Forum. Nay then, be elegy thy task, a work full of 
guile — here lies thy warfare ! — that other bards may 
write inspired by thee. Thou shalt endure the 
alluring strife of Venus' wars and shalt be a foeman 
meet for the shafts of Venus' boys. For whatever 
victories thy toil may win thee, there is one girl shall 
baffle thee ever; and though thou shake from thy 
mouth the hook that is fast therein, it will avail thee 
naught ; the rod shall keep thee captive with its 
barb. Her whim shall order thy waking and thy 
sleeping, and the tear shall not fall from thine eyes 
save at her command. Nor shall a thousand guards 
aid thee, nor a thousand seals set on her doors ; if she 
be resolved to cheat thee, a chink in the door will 
suffice her. And now whether thy bark be tossed 
in mid tempest or thou go'est unarmed amid an 
armoured foe, or earth tremble and yawn for thee 
with gaping chasm, fear thou the ill-omened back of 
the eight-footed Crab !

II 

Why marvellest thou that my one body should have 
so many shapes? Learn the tokens of the god 
Vertumnus' birth. A Tuscan I from Tuscans sprung, 
nor do I repent me that I left Volsinii's hearths 
amid the din of battle. This throng that is ever 
round me is my joy ; I need no ivory temple for 
my delight; enough that I can see the Roman 
Forum. 

7 There once the Tiber went, and they say that the 
sound of oars was heard across the smitten shallows. 
But after he had yielded thus much ground to his 
nurslings I was called the god Vertumnus from the 
turning of the river. Or else because I receive the 
first-fruits of the year as it turns its round, for this 
reason also thou deemest that offering to be
Vertumnus' due. For me the first grape changes colour 
with darkening cluster, and the spiked ear of corn 
swells with its milky fruit. Here thou seest sweet 
cherries glow, here autumn plums and summer
mulberries. Here the grafter pays his vows with garland 
of fruit, when the pear's unwilling stock hath borne 
him apples, 

19 Lying rumour be silent ; another warrant is there 
for my name; believe the god that tells his own 
tale. My nature suits with every form : turn me to 
what thou wilt, I shall still be comely. Clothe me in 
silks of Cos, I shall prove a graceful girl ; and when 
I wear the toga who shall deny me to be a man ? Give 
me a sickle and bind my brow with twisted hay, thou 
wilt swear that grass has been cut by my hands. 
Once I bore arms and, I mind me, won praise in war ; 
but when the heavy basket was placed upon my back 
I was a reaper. Sober am I when law-suits call, yet 
when the wreath is on my brow thou wilt cry that 
the wine has stolen to my head. Gird my head with 
a turban, I will steal for me the semblance of Iacchus ; 
I will steal the semblance of Phoebus if thou wilt but 
give me his lyre. With nets on my shoulder I go 
hunting ; but when the fowler's reed is in my hand I 
am that god who speeds the snaring of feathered fowl. 
Vertumnus takes also the guise of a charioteer, and of 
him who transfers his nimble weight from horse to 
horse. Supply me and with a rod I will take spoil of 
fish, or will go my way a spruce pedlar with trailing 
tunic. I can stoop like a shepherd o'er his crook ; 
I too can bring roses in baskets through the midst of 
summer's dust. For why should I add, since there 
lies my greatest fame, that the garden's choice 
gifts may be seen in my hands? The dark-green 
cucumber and the gourd with swelling belly and the 
cabbage tied with light rushes mark me out. Nor 
grows there any flower in the fields but is placed 
upon my brow and droops in comely fashion before 
my face. Nay, my name sprang from my deeds ; 
'twas because I turned to every shape that my native 
tongue bestowed it on me. 

49 And thou, Rome, thou didst reward my Tuscan 
kin — from whom to-day the Tuscan street is named 
— what time the Lycomedian came with succouring 
host and crushed the Sabine warriors of fierce Tatius. 
I saw the breaking ranks, the weapons cast to earth, 
I saw the foe turn his back in base flight. 

55 But do thou, O Father of the gods, grant that the 
toga-clad throng of Rome may pass for ever before 
my feet. 

57 Six lines remain ; I would not delay you that 
hurry to answer your bail ; this is the ending of my 
course. 

69 Once I was a maple stock, rough-hewn with 
hurried sickle ; 'twas before Numa's days I dwelt, no 
wealthy god, in the city of my love. But may the 
rude earth ne'er bruise thy cunning hands, Mamurius, 
that didst grave my form in bronze and hadst the 
skill to cast me to such changeful use. Thy work is 
but one, yet manifold the honour that it wins. 


III

This charge doth Arethusa send to her Lycotas, if I 
may call thee mine who art so often far from me. 
Yet if any part thou wouldst read be lost and blotted, 
the blot will have been made by my tears ; or if any 
letter baffle thee with uncertain outline, 'twill be the 
token of my right hand that now faints in death. 

7 Thee now did Bactra behold in the twice-visited 
East, now the Neuric foe with armoured steed, the 
wintry Getans, and Britain of the painted car and 
the swart Indian washed by the Eastern wave. 

11 Was this the meaning of thy wedded troth, of the 
night pledged to our kisses, when a stranger in love's 
warfare I yielded to thine onset? The torch that 
burned with ominous light before me as they led me 
to thy house drew its baleful flame from the ruins 
of some pyre ; I was sprinkled with water from the 
pool of Styx, the wreath was set awry upon my hair : 
Hymen was not with me when I wedded. On every 
gate, alas ! are hung my vows for thy safety, vows that 
bring naught save woe, and 'tis now the fourth cloak 
1 am weaving for thy warfare. Perish the man first 
plucked the soldier's stake from some unoffending 
tree, and wrought mournful trumpets from hoarse- 
echoing bones ! Worthier he than Ocnus to twist 
the rope, sitting slantwise at the task, and to feed 
thy hungry maw, poor ass, to all eternity ! 

23 Tell me, does the breastplate gall thy soft arms ? 
does the heavy spear chafe thy hands that were not 
meant for war ? Sooner let spear and breastplate 
hurt thee than that any girl should mar thy neck 
with the marks of her teeth, marks that must bring 
me tears to weep ! They say, too, that thy face is 
lean and drawn : only I pray that thy pallor spring 
but from longing for me. 

29 Meanwhile I, when evening brings round for 
me the bitter night, kiss whatever of thy weapons 
lie left at home. Then I complain that the coverlet 
will never stay upon my couch, and that the birds 
that herald dawn are slow to sing. Through the 
nights of winter I toil to weave thee raiment for thy 
life in camp, and sew lengths of woollen cloth purple 
with Tyrian dye, only to meet the sword. I learn 
where flows the Araxes thou must conquer, and how 
many miles the Parthian charger can run without 
slaking his thirst. I am driven also to study from 
a map the painted world and to learn what is the 
position of the far-northern Dahan, what lands are 
stiff with frost, what crumbling with heat, and what 
is the wind that may waft thy sails safe home to Italy. 

41 My sister only waits on my sorrows, and my nurse, 
turning pale, swears falsely 'tis winter's season that 
delays thee. Happy Hippolyte ! bare-breasted she 
bore arms and savage-hearted hid her soft locks 
beneath the helm. Would that the camps of Rome 
had opened their gates to women ; then had I been 
the faithful burden of thy warfare. Nor would 
Scythia's hills delay me when Father Jove binds the 
deep waters to ice with keener cold. Love is mighty 
ever, but mightier far for an acknowledged husband ; 
this flame Venus herself fans that it may live. 

61 To what purpose now should robes of purple shine 
for me with Punic dye or clear crystal adorn my 
fingers ? All things are silent and deaf ; the Lares' 
closed shrine is opened on the Kalends, that come 
so seldom, and scarce even then by one solitary 
handmaid on her accustomed round. Dear to me is 
the whine of the little dog Craugis : she only claims 
thy place in my bed. I cover shrines with flowers, I 
wreathe the cross-roads with sacred branches, and 
the herb Sabine crackles for me on ancient altars. 
If the owl perched on some neighbouring bough 
makes moan, or the lamp, as it burns low, needs the 
sprinkling of wine, that day orders sacrifice of this 
year's lambs, and the high-girt priests busy
themselves to win fresh profit. 

63 Count not, I pray, too high the glory of scaling 
Bactra's walls, or the spoil of fine linen torn from 
some perfumed chief, in that hour when the bolts of 
the twisted sling are scattered abroad and the crafty 
bow twangs from the flying steed ! But — so when 
Parthia's nurslings are tamed may the headless 
spear-shaft follow thy triumphant steeds ! — do thou 
keep unsullied the pact that binds thee to my bed ! 
Tis the sole condition on which I would have thee 
return ! Then when I shall have carried thine armour 
and votive offering to the Capene gate I will write 
beneath it : THE THANK-OFFERING OF A GRATEFUL WIFE
FOR HER HUSBAND'S SAFETY. 


IV 

I will tell of the Tarpeian grove, of Tarpeia's 
shameful tomb, and of the capture of the house of 
ancient Jove. This mount did Tatius gird with 
palisade of maple and ringed his camp securely with 
circling mound. What was Rome in those days when 
the trumpeter of Cures made the neighbouring cliffs, 
where Jove sits throned, tremble before his long- 
drawn blast, and when Sabine javelins stood in the 
Roman Forum, where now laws are given to the
conquered world ? Rome had no ramparts save her hills. 
Where now stands the Senate-house hedged in by 
walls, once the war-horse drank from a slender spring. 

3 A goodly grove there was, hidden in a rocky, ivy- 
mantled glen, and many a tree made answering
murmur to its native springs. 'Twas the branching home 
of Sylvanus, whither the sweet pipe would call the 
sheep from the hot sun to drink. From this spring 
Tarpeia drew water for her goddess, and the urn 
of earthenware bowed down her head whereon 'twas 
poised. 

17 Ah ! could one death alone suffice for doom of that 
accursed maid that had the heart to betray thy sacred 
fire, O Vesta ? She saw Tatius practise for battle on 
the sandy plain and lift his flashing spear amid the 
yellow helmet-plumes. Dumbstruck she marvelled at 
the king's face and at the kingly armour, and the urn 
fell from her forgetful hands. Often did she plead 
that the moon boded ill — yet the moon was guiltless — 
and said that she must bathe her locks in the running 
stream. Often she offered silvery lilies to the kindly 
nymphs, that the spear of Romulus might not wound 
the face of Tatius ; and while she climbed the Capitol 
clouded with the first smoke of morning she came home 
with arms torn by rough brambles. And thus as she 
sate on the Tarpeian height she bewailed the wounds 
that Jove in his dwelling hard by might not forgive : 

31 "Watchfires of the camp and thou, royal tent 
amidst the host of Tatius, and Sabine armour so lovely 
to mine eyes, would that I might sit a captive before 
your household gods, if so I might behold the face of 
Tatius ! Farewell, ye hills of Rome, and Rome that 
crowns the hills, and Vesta brought to shame by my 
sin ! That horse, o'er whose right shoulder Tatius 
smooths the mane, that horse and none other shall 
bear me love-maddened to his camp, my home. 

39 « What marvel if Scylla waxed fierce against her 
father's locks and her white waist was transformed to 
fierce hounds ? What marvel that the horns of the 
monstrous brotherwere betrayed, when the path 
was revealed by the gathering of the thread ? What 
reproach I shall bring upon Ausonia's maids, I the 
traitress that was chosen to be the handmaid of the 
virgin hearth ! If any shall marvel that the fires of 
Pallas are extinguished, let him pardon me ! The 
altar is sprinkled with my tears ! 

47 "To-morrow, so rumour tells, there shall be a 
purification through all the city; do thou take the dewy 
ridge of the thorn-clad hill. The path is slippery and 
treacherous through all its length : for alway it hides 
silent waters on its deceitful track. Would that I 
knew the charms of the magic Muse ! Then had my 
tongue also brought thee succour, my beauteous lover ! 
The royal robe beseems thee rather than that
motherless wight, whom the rude teat of the savage
shewolf suckled. 

56 "Wilt thou make me thy queen on these terms, 
O stranger, and shall I bear thee children in thy halls ? 
With me comes Rome betrayed, no puny dower ! If 
thou wilt not have me thus, ravish me and have thy 
vengeance in turn, that the Sabine maids be not 
ravished unavenged ! I have the power to part the 
hosts when locked in battle : enter, ye brides, on 
reconciling peace ! My robe of marriage shows the 
way ! And do thou, Hymenaeus, sound thy strain : 
trumpeter, hush thy wild blasts ; believe me, my 
marriage-bed shall assuage your warfare. 

63 "Now the fourth bugle sings the approach of 
dawn, and the stars themselves sink to their rest in 
Ocean. I will try sleep and will seek for dreams of 
thee : grant that thy semblance may come to cheer 
mine eyes." 

67 She spake, and let fall her arms in uneasy 
slumber : she knew not, alas ! that she had laid her 
down to be the prey of fresh furies. For Vesta, the 
blessed guardian of the Trojan embers, fed her sin 
with fuel and hid more firebrands in her bones. She 
rushed away, like the Strymonian Amazon by swift 
Thermodon's bank, with raiment torn and bosom 
bared to view. 

73 'Twas a feast-day in the city — the Fathers named 
it Parilia — the birthday of the walls of Rome, the 
yearly banquet of the shepherds, when the city makes 
merry, when country platters are moistened with rich 
fare, and the drunken crowd flings dust-stained feet 
o'er heaps of burning hay placed here and there. 
Romulus decreed that the watchmen should take 
their ease in rest, that the trumpet should be laid 
aside and the camp have silence. Tarpeia deemed 
her hour had come and met the foeman : she made 
her pact, herself a part thereof. 

83 The hill was treacherous of ascent, but unguarded 
by reason of the feast ; of a sudden with his sword 
he cuts down the noisy watchdogs. All was slumber : 
only Jove had resolved to wake that he might work 
thy doom. She had betrayed the secret of the gate, 
betrayed her prostrate country, and asked for
marriage on the day of her own choice. But Tatius — for 
even the foe gave no honour to crime — answered : 
" Marry then, and climb thus my royal bed." He 
spake and bade his comrades crush her beneath their 
piled shields. Such, Vestal, was thy dower, meet 
guerdon of thy services. 

93 The hill took its name from Tarpeia, the
foeman's guide. O watcher, unjustly hast thou won this 
recompense for thy doom.


V 

May the earth cover thy tomb with thorns, thou 
bawd, and may thy shade be parched with thirst, for 
thirst thou hatest. May thy ghost find no rest 
among thine ashes, and may vengeful Cerberus fright 
thy dishonoured bones with hungry howl. 

6 Skilled to win even Hippolytus that said 
" Nay " to love, and ever worst of omens to lovers' 
peace, she could force even Penelope to be deaf to 
rumours of her husband's safety and to wed with 
wanton Antinous. Should she will it, the magnet 
will refuse to draw the steel, and the bird prove a 
stepmother to her nestlings. Nay, did she bring 
herbs from the Colline field to the magic trench, 
things solid would dissolve into running water. She 
dared put spells upon the moon to do her bidding 
and to disguise her shape beneath the form of the 
night-prowling wolf, that by her cunning she might 
blind jealous husbands, and with her nails she tore 
out the undeserving eyes of crows ; she consulted 
owls how she might have my blood, and gathered 
for my destruction the charm that drips from the 
pregnant mare.

19 She plied her task, alas ! with flattering words, 
even as the persistent mole bores out its stony path. 
Thus would she speak : " If the golden shores of the 
Dorozantes delight thee, or the shell that flaunts 
its purple in the Tyrian sea, if Eurypylus' weft of 
Coan silk please thee or crumbling figures cut from 
coverlets of gold, or the wares sent from palm-
bearing Thebes and myrrhine goblets baked in Parthian 
kilns, then spurn thine oath, and down with the 
gods ! Let lies win the day ! Break all the laws of 
chastity ; they bring but loss ! Feign that thou hast 
a husband ; 'twill heighten thy price ! Use every 
excuse ! Love will return with added fire after a 
night's delay. If perchance he be angry and tear 
thy hair, his anger shall bring thee profit; after 
that thou must torment him till he purchase peace. 
Then when he has bought thine embraces and thou 
hast promised him enjoyment of thy love, see that 
thou feign that the days of Isis are come, enjoining
abstinence. Let lole thrust on thy notice that 
April's Kalends are near, let Amycle din into thine 
ears that thy birthday falls on the Ides of May. He 
sits in supplication before thee. Take thy chair and 
write somewhat : if he trembles at these tricks thou 
hast him fast! Ever have fresh bites about thy 
throat, that he may deem to have been given in the 
strife of love. But delight not thou in the railing of 
importunate Medea — she was cast off that had dared 
be first to ask for love. But rather be costly Thais thy 
pattern, of whom Menander's wit hath told, when the 
harlot of the stage tricks the shrewd Scythian slaves. 

46 " Change thy ways to suit thy man. If he 
boasts his powers of song, accompany him and join 
thy drunken voice to his. Let thy porter be open- 
eyed for them that bring gifts ; if he that knocks be 
empty-handed, let him sleep on, propped on the bar 
that is drawn across the door. Nor would I have thee 
spurn soldiers not made for love, nor sailors, if their 
horny hands bring coin, nor yet one of those on whose 
barbarian necks the salesman's bill has hung, when 
with whitened feet they danced in the marketplace. 
Look to the gold, not to the hand that brings 
it. Though thou give ear to their verse, what will be 
thine save empty words ? ' What boots it, light of 
my life, to go forth with locks adorned, and to rustle 
in slender folds of Coan silk ? ' Who brings thee 
verse yet never a gift of Coan raiment, let his lyre meet 
with deaf ears, since it brings no pelf. While spring 
is in the blood and thy years know not wrinkles, use 
thy time, lest the morrow take toll of thy beauty ! 
I have seen the rose-beds of perfumed Paestum 
that should have lived lie blasted at morn by the 
Scirocco's breath." 

63 While thus Acanthis plied my mistress' soul, all 
my bones might be counted beneath the shrunken 
skin. But do thou, Queen Venus, receive my thank- 
offering, a ring-dove's throat cut before thine altar. 
I saw the cough clot in her wrinkled throat, and 
the bloodstained spittle trickle through her hollow 
teeth. I saw her breathe out her plague-struck 
spirit on the blankets that were once her father's : 
the hearth was chill and the broken shed where she 
lay shivered for cold. For pomp of funeral she had 
but the stolen bands that bound her scanty hair, a 
mutch with colour dimmed by foul neglect ; and the 
dog that of old was over-wakeful for my woes, when 
with stealthy fingers I had to slip the bolts that 
barred the door. Let the bawd's tomb be an old 
wine-jar with broken neck, and over it, wild fig-tree, 
put thou forth thy might. Whoe'er thou art that 
lovest, batter this grave with jagged stones, and 
mingled with the stones add words of cursing ! 


VI 

The priest doth sacrifice ; be silent all that his
sacrifice may prosper, and let the heifer fall smitten before 
mine altar-hearths. Let the garland of Rome vie 
with the ivy-clusters of Philetas, and let the urn 
serve me with water of Cyrene. Give me soft nard 
and offerings of appeasing incense, and thrice about 
the hearth be the woollen fillet twined. Sprinkle 
me with water, and by the new-built altar let the 
ivoiy pipe make libation of song from Phrygian 
vessels. Fly hence afar all guile, and beneath other 
skies let mischief dwell ; new is the path the priest 
must tread, but the pure laurel-branch doth make it 
smooth for him. 

11 My Muse, we will tell of the temple of Palatine 
Apollo ; Calliope, the theme is worthy of thy favour. 
My songs are spun for the glory of Caesar : while 
Caesar is the theme of song, do thou, Jupiter, even 
thou, rest from thy labours and give ear. 

16 By the Athamanian shores where Phoebus dwells 
there lies a haven, whose bay hushes the roar of the 
Ionian sea, Actium's wide water that guards the 
memory of the Julian bark, and gives easy entrance 
to the mariner's prayer. Here met the hosts of all 
the world : motionless on the deep stood the huge 
ships of pine, yet smiled not fortune alike on all their 
oars. There stood one fleet, doomed by Trojan 
Quirinus, and Roman javelins — ah ! shame ! — were 
grasped in a woman's hand. And there stood the 
ship of Augustus, its sails filled by the blessing of 
Jove, its standards long since taught to conquer for 
their country's sake. And now Nereus had bent the 
lines to twin crescent curves and the water quivered 
bright with the flash of arms, when Phoebus, leaving 
Delos, that abides firmly rooted now beneath his protection — 
for once alone of isles it was the sport of the 
South Wind's anger — took his stand above Augustus' 
ship, and thrice a strange flame shone forth, bent like 
the slant lightning-flash. He came not with hair 
streaming o'er his neck or with peaceful music of the 
tortoise lyre ; but his face was as when he looked on 
Agamemnon Pelops' son, and carried forth the warriors 
of the Dorian camp to the greedy funeral pyre ; or 
as when he slew the serpent Python, the terror of 
the peaceful Muses, and relaxed its coils in death. 

87 Then he spake : " O saviour of the world,
Augustus, sprung from Alba Longa and known for greater 
than thy Trojan sires, conquer now by sea ! Already the 
land is thine. My bow fights for thee, and every arrow 
that burdens my shoulders wishes thee well. Free 
thy country from fear, thy country that, relying on 
thy protection, hath freighted thy bark with a nation's 
prayers. If thou defend her not, 'twas in evil hour 
that Romulus, as he sought omens for the founding 
of his walls, beheld the birds fly forth from the 
Palatine. Aye ! and too near they venture with their 
oars ! Shame that Latium's waves, while thou art 
prince, should bear the sails of a queen ! Nor let it 
fright thee that their fleet is winged, each ship, with an 
hundred oars. The sea whereon it sails will have none 
of it. And though the prows bear figures threatening
to cast rocks such as centaurs throw, thou shalt 
find them but hollow planks and painted terrors. 
'Tis his cause that makes or mars a soldier's strength. 
If the cause be not just, shame strikes the weapon 
from his hands. The time is come ! Launch thy ships 
upon the foe ! 'Tis I appoint the hour of battle and 
will guide the Julian prows with laurel-bearing hand." 

55 He spake and gave his quiver's burden to the 
bow; after his shafts the spear of Caesar was first 
to fly. Phoebus kept troth and Rome conquered; 
the woman met her doom, and broken sceptres 
floated on Ionia's waves. But his sire Caesar gazed 
marvelling from his Idalian star : " I am a god, and 
thy victory gives proof that thou art sprung from our 
blood." Triton hailed the victor with his song, and 
all the sea-goddesses clapped their hands around the 
standards of liberty. But she, vainly trusting in her 
flying sloop, sought the Nile ; this only did she win, 
death at the hour of her own choice. Heaven willed 
it and 'twas better so ; how mean a triumph would one 
woman make in those streets through which Jugurtha 
once was led ! 

67 Hence Actian Phoebus won his temple. Each 
arrow sped from his bow vanquished ten vessels of 
the foe. 

69 I have sung enough of war: victorious Apollo 
now demands my lyre, and doffs his armour for the 
dances of peace. Let white-robed banqueters enter 
the luxuriant grove, and winsome roses stream about 
my neck. Be wine outpoured crushed in Falernian 
presses, and thrice let Cilician saffron bathe my locks. 
Let the Muse stir poets that now are fired with wine ; 
Bacchus, 'tis thy wont to inspire Phoebus whom thou 
lovest. Let one tell how the Sycambri of the marsh 
have bowed to slavery, another sing of the dusky 
realms of Cephean Meroe ; let another record how 
late in time the Parthian hath made truce and owned 
defeat. " Let him return the standards of Remus ; 
soon shall he yield up his own. Or if Augustus spare 
for a little the quivers of the East, let him put off 
those trophies that his boys may win them. Rejoice, 
Crassus, if thou knowest aught in the darkness of the 
sands where thou liest : now may we cross Euphrates 
to thy grave." Thus will I pass the night with drink 
and thus with song, till dawn shall cast its rays upon 
my wine. 


VII 

The Shades are no fable : death is not the end of 
all, and the pale ghost escapes the vanquished pyre. 
For Cynthia seemed to bend o' er my couch's head, 
Cynthia so lately buried beside the roaring road, as 
fresh from love's entombment I slept a broken sleep 
and mourned that the bed that was my kingdom was 
void and cold. Her hair, her eyes were the same as 
when she was borne to the grave : her raiment was 
charred against her side, and the fire had eaten away 
the beryl ring her finger wore, and the water of 
Lethe had withered her lips. Spirit and voice yet 
lived, but the thumb-bones rattled on her brittle 
hands. 

13 " False heart ! " she cried, " — yet ne'er may 
woman hope for truer — can sleep have power on 
thee so soon ? So soon hast thou forgotten the guile 
we practised in the sleepless Subura and my window 
worn by our cunning in the night? — that window 
from which so oft for thy sake I let down the rope 
and hung in mid air, as with alternate hand descending
I came to thine embrace. Oft at the cross-ways 
were our rites accomplished and the road grew warm 
beneath our cloaks as we lay breast to breast. Alas 
for that wordless bond whose cheating terms the 
deaf wind of the South-West has swept away ! Yet 
no man called upon my name as I passed and mine 
eyelids closed : surely hadst thou recalled me, I had 
been granted one more day. No watchman rattled 
his cleft reed for my sake, and a broken tile wounded 
my defenceless brow. Aye, and who saw thee bowed 
with grief at my graveside ? who saw thy robe of 
mourning grow hot with thy tears? If it vexed 
thee to go further than my portal, yet thus far thou 
mightest have bidden my bier be borne more slowly. 
Why, ungrateful, prayedst thou not for winds to fan 
my pyre ? Why were the flames wherein I burned 
not fragrant with nard ? Was this also a burden, to 
cast hyacinths — no costly gift — upon me and to
appease mine ashes with wine from the shattered jar ? 

35 " Let Lygdamus be burned, let the branding-iron 
glow white for the slave of mine house ! I knew his 
guilt when I drank the wine that struck me pale. 
And as for cunning Nomas, let her hide her secret 
poisons if she will ! The burning potsherd shall convict 
her hands of guilt. She that of old was public to 
all men's gaze and asked so little for her love, 
now marks the dust with her train's golden hem, 
and if some chattering slave hath praised my beauty, 
requites her unjustly with heavier tasks of wool. 
For bearing wreaths to my sepulchre aged Petale 
is shackled to a foul clog of wood, while Lalage is 
hung by her twisted hair and scourged for daring to 
ask a boon in my name. 

47 " And thou didst suffer her to melt mine image 
of gold, that so she might win her dowry from the 
flame that consumed me. Yet I chide thee not, 
Propertius, though thou deservest my chiding : long 
did I reign supreme in thy songs. I swear by the 
chant of the Fates that none may make unsung (and 
may the three-headed hound lull his baying for me, 
as I speak true), I swear that I kept faith to thee. 
If I lie, may the adder hiss on my tomb and couch 
above my bones. 

65 "Two mansions are there allotted beside the 
foul stream of Hell, and all the dead must ply the 
oar this way or that. One bark bears the adultery 
of Clytemestra, another the monstrous timber of the 
feigned Cretan cow ; but lo ! yet others are swept 
away in wreathed boat, where blessed airs fan the 
roses of Elysium, where the harp makes music and 
the round cymbals of Cybelle, and turbaned dancers 
strike the Lydian lyre. Andromede and Hypermestra,
souls renowned, wives without blame, tell 
forth their story. The one complains that her arms 
are bruised with the chains brought on her by her 
mother's pride, and that her hands deserved not to 
be bound to icy crags. Hypermestra tells how her 
sisters dared a mighty deed, and how she had not 
heart for such a crime. Thus with the tears of death 
we heal the passions of life ; I hide in silence the 
many sins of thy faithlessness. 

71 " But now I charge thee, if perchance my words 
move thee, and the spells of Chloris hold not all 
thy soul : let my nurse Parthenie lack naught in her 
years of palsied eld ; she was kind to thee and 
clutched not at thy gold. And let not my darling 
Latris, whose name came from her service, hold up 
the mirror for another mistress. And all the verses 
thou didst make in mine honour, burn them, I pray 
thee ; cease to win praise through me. Drive the 
ivy from my tomb, that with grappling cluster and 
twining leaves binds my frail bones, where apple- 
bearing Anio broods o'er its orchard meadows and by 
the favour of Hercules the ivory ne'er grows yellow. 
And write these verses on a pillar's midst ; they shall 
be worthy of me, but brief, that the traveller may 
read them as he hastens by : here golden cynthia 

LIES IN THE FIELDS OF TIBUR. ANIO, NEW PRAISE IS 
ADDED TO THY BANK. 

87 « Nor spurn thou visions that come through 
holy portals; when dreams are holy they have the 
weight of truth. By night we range in wandering 
flight ; night frees the prisoned shades, and
Cerberus himself strays at will, the bar that chains him 
cast aside. At dawn Hell's ordinance bids us return 
to the pools of Lethe : we are ferried over and the 
mariner tells o'er his freight. 

93 « Now let others possess thee ! Soon shalt thou 
be mine alone; with me shalt thou be, and I will 
grind bone with mingled bone." 

95 When thus in querulous plaint she had brought 
her tale to a close, her spirit vanished from my 
embrace. 


VIII 

Learn what this night struck panic through the 
watery Esquiline, when all the neighbours ran
headlong through the New Fields. 

3 Lanuvium is from of old under the guard of 
an ancient serpent ; thou shalt not count it wasted 
time if thou give an hour to so wondrous a visit. 
Here down a dark chasm plunges a sacred path, 
where penetrates the offering of the hungry snake — 
beware, O maid, of all such paths as this ! — when he 
demands his yearly tribute of food and sends forth 
loud hisses from the depths of earth. Maids that 
are sent down to rites such as this turn pale when 
their hand is rashly trusted in the serpent's mouth. 
He seizes the morsels that the virgin 'holds toward 
him : even the baskets tremble in the virgin's hands. 
If they have been chaste, they return to embrace 
their parents, and farmers cry : " 'Twill be a fertile 
year." 

16 Hither was my Cynthia drawn by close-clipped 
ponies. She pleaded Juno's worship; more truly 
had she pleaded rites of Venus. Tell forth, prithee, 
thou Appian Way, what a triumphal journey she 
made before thine eyes, as her wheels whirled madly 
over thy paving-stones, [when a noisy brawl broke 
out in a secret tavern and brought shame on my fair 
name, though I was not there]. She was a sight to 
see as she sat there bending over the pole's end and 
daring to drive amain through rough places. For 
I say naught of the silk-hung chariot of the close- 
shaven fop, nor of the dogs with rich collars about 
their Molossian necks; some day he will sell his 
doomed body to feed on the foul fare of a gladiator, 
when the beard whereof he is now ashamed shall 
master those close-shaven cheeks. 

27 Since so oft she wronged our bed, I resolved 
to change my couch and pitch my camp elsewhere. 
There is a certain Phyllis, that dwells nigh Diana on 
the Aventine. Sober she pleases me little; when 
she drinks all is charm. Another there is, one Teia, 
that dwells 'twixt the Tarpeian groves ; fair is she, 
but when the wine is on her, one lover will be all too 
few. These two I resolved to summon to make night 
pass less sadly, and to renew my amorous adventures 
with love still strange to me. One little couch there 
was for three on a secret lawn. Dost ask how we 
lay ? I was between the two. Lygdamus had charge 
of our cups ; we had a service of glass to suit the 
summer with Greek wine that smacked of Methymna. 
Thou, Nile, didst provide us with a piper, while 
Phyllis played the castanets, and, fair in her artless 
beauty, was right content to be pelted with roses. 
Magnus himself, with short and shrunken limbs, 
clapped his deformed hands to the sound of the 
hollow boxwood flute. But, though their bowls 
were full, the lamp-flames flickered, and the table's 
top fell upside down on the feet that had supported 
it. And as for me, while I sought for sixes from the 
favouring dice, ever the ruinous aces leapt to light. 
They sang to me, but I was deaf. They bared their 
bosoms, but I was blind. Alas ! I stood alone at 
Lanuvium's gates. 

49 And lo ! of a sudden the door-posts groaned harsh 
with turning hinge, and a light sound was heard at 
the entrance of the house. Straightway Cynthia 
hurled back the folding portals, Cynthia with hair 
disordered, yet lovely in her fury. My fingers loosed 
their grasp and dropped the cup; my lips turned 
pale though drunken with wine. Her eyes flashed 
fire : she raged with all a woman's fury. The sight 
was fearful as a city's sack. She dashed her angry 
nails in Phyllis' face : Teia calls out in terror on all 
the watery neighbourhood. The brandished lights 
awakened the slumbering citizens, and all the street 
rang loud with the madness of the night. The girls 
fled with dishevelled raiment and tresses torn, and 
the first tavern in the street received them. 

63 Cynthia rejoiced in her spoils and hastened back 
to me victorious, and bruised my face with cruel hands, 
and marked my neck with her teeth, till her bite 
drew blood, and above all smote mine eyes that had 
deserved her blows. Then when her arms were tired 
with beating me she routed forth Lygdamus, who 
lay hid on our left crouched beneath the couch's 
head at its very feet. Dragged forth to light, 
he implored protection from my guardian spirit. 
Lygdamus, I was powerless; I was thy fellow- 
captive. 

71 At last I yielded to her terms, my hands
outstretched in suppliant wise ; but scarce would she let 
me so much as touch her feet, and said : " If thou 
wouldst have me pardon the sin thou hast done, hear 
the conditions of the law that I impose. Never 
shalt thou walk abroad in rich attire in the shade of 
Pompey's colonnade, nor when the sand is strewn in 
the wanton Forum. Beware that thou bend not 
thy neck awry to gaze at the theatre's topmost ring ; 
let never a litter yield itself uncurtained to thy 
loitering gaze. And above all let Lygdamus, chief 
cause of my complaint, be sold and trail double 
shackles on his feet." 

81 Such were the terms she imposed. I replied : 
" I accept the terms." She laughed, exulting in the 
dominion I had given her over me. Then she purified 
with fire each place that the foreign girls had touched, 
and cleansed the threshold with pure water ; she bade 
me change all my raiment anew, and thrice touched 
my head with burning sulphur. Then when every 
covering of the bed had been changed, I bowed to her 
will and we made up our quarrel on the couch we 
knew so well. 


IX 

What time Amphitryon's son drove the oxen from 
thy stalls, O Erythea, he came to that hill untamed 
by man, the sheep-grazed Palatine, and there, 
himself aweary, halted his weary kine, where the 
Velabrum spread its stagnant stream and the mariner 
sailed over waters in the city's midst. But the kine 
remained not safe, since Cacus proved a disloyal host, 
and outraged Jove with theft. Cacus was a dweller 
in the place, a robber issuing from his dreaded cave, 
who spake with threefold utterance from three 
several mouths. He, v that there might be no sure 
token to betray his theft, dragged the cattle tail
foremost to his cave. But the god beheld him : the 
lowing steers revealed the thief, and wrath beat 
down the thief's cruel doors. 

15 Cacus lay low, thrice smitten on the brow with 
the Maenalian club, and thus spake Alcides : " Go, 
ye oxen, go, oxen of Hercules, the last labour of my 
club. Twice, oxen, did I seek ye, and twice ye were 
my prey. Go ye and with your long-drawn lowing 
hallow the Place of Oxen ; your pasture shall in times 
to come be the far-famed Forum of Rome." He 
spake, and thirst tortured his parched palate, while 
teeming earth supplied no water. 

23 But far off he heard the laughter of cloistered 
maids, where a sacred grove made a dark encircling 
wood, the secret place of the Goddess of Women, 
with holy fountains and rites ne'er revealed to men 
save to their cost. Wreaths of purple veiled its 
portals far-withdrawn and a ruinous hovel shone 
with sweet fire of incense. A poplar decked the 
shrine with far-spread leaves, and its deep foliage 
shielded singing birds. 

31 Hither he rushed, the dust thick-clotted on his 
parched beard, and before the portal spake wild 
words unworthy of a god. " Ye, that make merry in 
the sacred dells of the grove, I pray you, open your
hospitable shrine to a weary man. Athirst for water 
I wander, while all the place is loud with the sound 
of streams. Enough for me were a draught of the 
running brook caught in the hollow of my hand. 
Have ye heard of one that bore the globe on his 
back ? I am he ; the world I carried calls me 
Alcides. Who has not heard of the mighty deeds of 
Hercules' club, and of those shafts that ne'er were 
spent in vain on ravening beasts? Who has not 
heard how for me alone of mortals the darkness of 
Hell was not dark ? Receive me ; this land is all 
but closed to me and I am aweary. Nay, though ye 
were sacrificing to Juno, that is my bane, even my 
stepdame had not closed her waters to me. But if 
some one of you be frighted by my visage and the 
lion's mane and my locks burnt by the Libyan sun, 
I also have performed servile tasks, clad in Sidonian 
cloak, and wrought the day's tale of wool with Lydian 
distaff. My shaggy breast was girt by the soft breast- 
band, and though my hands were horny I proved a 
nimble girl." 

51 So spake Alcides; but thus replied the kindly 
priestess, her white hair bound in a purple band : 
" Forbear to gaze, O stranger, and leave this dreaded 
grove. Come, leave it, depart from its threshold 
and seek safety in flight. The altar that guards its 
sanctity in this secret hut is forbidden to men, and 
dire is the doom that avenges its pollution. At great 
cost did the seer Tiresias behold Pallas, while she 
bathed her mighty limbs, the Gorgon breastplate laid 
aside. The gods give thee other fountains! This 
one stream flows for maidens only in secret channel 
far from the paths of men." So spake the aged 
dame. He with his shoulders shattered the
doorposts that barred his sight, nor could the closed gate 
endure the fury of his thirst. 

68 But after he had quenched his burning and 
drained the stream to naught, with lips scarce dry 
he pronounced this stern decree : " This corner of the 
world hath now received me as I drag out my doom : 
weary though I be this land is all but closed to me. 
May that Mightiest of Altars dedicated for the finding 
of my flocks, this altar made Mightiest by mine hands, 
never be open to women's worship, that the thirst of 
Hercules be avenged to all eternity." 

71 Hail, Holy Sire, on whom now cruel Juno smiles. 
Holy one, I pray thee to take thy place in my book 
with blessing. This hero of old, for that he had 
cleansed the world with his hands and made it holy, 
Tatian Cures established in his temple as the Holy 
one.
 

X 

Now will I begin to show forth the origins of Feretrian
Jupiter and to tell of the triple spoils of armour
won from three several chiefs. Great are the heights 
I must scale, but glory lends me strength ; crowns 
plucked from easy summits please me not. 

5 Thou, Romulus, first didst win this prize and earnest 
home laden with the spoil of thy foe, what time thou 
didst vanquish Caeninian Acron, as he sought the 
gates of Rome, and with thy spear didst hurl him 
dead upon his fallen steed. Acron, the chieftain 
from Caenina's citadel, sprung from the seed of
Hercules, was once the terror of thy lands, O Rome. 
He dared to hope for spoil from Quirinus' shoulders, 
but himself gave up his own, spoil dripping with his 
own life-blood. Him Romulus espied, as he poised 
his javelin against the hollow towers, and forestalled 
him with a vow that heaven approved : " Jupiter, 
behold thy victim; to-day shall Acron fall in thine 
honour." The vow was made, and Acron fell to be 
the spoil of Jupiter. Thus was he wont to conquer, 
the father of Rome and the Virtues, who from homes 
of thrift endured the hardships of the camp. The 
knight was ready alike to guide the war-horse or 
the plough ; his helm was of wolf-skin decked with 
shaggy plume, his shield shone not with gaudy inlay 
of golden bronze, and his tough belt was but the 
hide of slaughtered kine. Not yet was the sound 
of war heard beyond Tiber's bank, and Nomentum 
and the three acres of captured Cora were Rome's 
furthest prey. 

23 Cossus comes next with the slaughter of Tolumnius,
Veii's lord, in the days when even to have power 
for Veii's conquest was a mighty task. Alas ! Veii, 
thou ancient city, thou too wert then a kingdom and 
the throne of gold was set in thy market-place : now 
within thy walls is heard the horn of the idle
shepherd, and they reap the cornfields amid thy people's 
bones. It chanced that Veii's chief stood on the 
tower above the gate and parleyed without fear from 
his own city : and while the ram shook the walls 
with brazen horn, where the long mantlet shielded 
the siege-works' line, Cossus cried : " 'Twere better 
for the brave to meet in open field." No tarrying 
then, but both stood forth on the level plain. The 
gods aided the Latin's hands, and Tolumnius' severed 
neck bathed Roman steeds with blood. 

39 Claudius beat back the foe that had crossed 
from the banks of Rhone, when the Belgic shield 
of the giant chief Virdomarus was brought back to 
Rome. He boasted to be sprung from Rhine
himself, and nimble was he to hurl the Gallic spear from 
unswerving chariot. Even as in striped breeches he 
went forth before his host, the bent torque fell from 
his severed throat. 

45 These triple spoils are stored in the temple. 
Hence comes Feretrius , name, because with heaven's 
sure favour chief smote chief with the sword : or else 
the proud altar of Feretrian Jupiter hath won its name 
because the victor bore the armour of the vanquished 
on his shoulders. 


XI 

Cease, Paullus, to burden my grave with tears : no 
prayers may open the gate of darkness ; when once 
the dead have passed beneath the rule of Hell the 
ways are barred with inexorable adamant. Though 
thine entreaty reach the ears of the god that reigns 
in the house of gloom, the shores of Styx shall drink 
thy tears unmoved. Heaven only is won by
supplication : when the ferryman has received his toll, 
the pale portal closes on the world of shadows. Such 
was the burden of the trumpets' strain, when the 
cruel torch was placed beneath my pyre and the 
flames engulfed my head. 

11 What availed me the wedded love of Paullus ? 
what the triumphal chariot of mine ancestors, or 
those that live to bear such witness to their mother's 
glory? Cornelia found not therefore the Fates less 
cruel, and lo ! I am now but one little handful of 
dust. Dark night of doom, and ye, O shallow, 
stagnant meres, and every stream that winds about 
my feet, guiltless, though untimely, am I come 
hither, and may Father Dis deal gentle judgment 
to my soul. Else, if there be an Aeacus who sits in 
judgment with the urn at his side, let him punish 
my shade when the lot bearing my name is drawn. 
Let the two brothers sit by him, and near the seat of 
Minos let the stern band of Furies stand, while all 
the court is hushed to hear my doom. Sisyphus, be 
thou freed awhile from thy huge stone ! Hushed 
be Ixion's wheel I And thou, baffling water, be thou 
caught by the lips of Tantalus ! To-day let cruel 
Cerberus attack no shade, let his chain hang slack 
from its silent bar ! Myself I plead my cause. If I 
plead falsely, let the woeful urn that is the Danaid 
sisters' doom bow down my shoulders ! 

29 If ancestral trophies have e'er won glory for any, 
why, then, the statues of my house tell of Numantine 
ancestry, while yonder is gathered a not less glorious 
band, the Libones of my mother s line : on either 
side my house is pillared with glory. Such was my 
birth; thereafter when the maid's robe of purple 
was laid aside before the torch of marriage, and a 
new wreath caught up and bound my hair, I was 
wedded to thy couch, my Paullus, doomed, alas ! to 
leave it thus. Behold the legend on this stone : " To 
one and one alone was she espoused." I call to 
witness the ashes of my sires, revered, O Rome, by 
thee ; beneath their glory's record thou, Africa, liest 
beaten to the dust. . . . [/ call the chiefs of Carthage 
and the East] and Perseus, whose soul was spurred by 
the thought that he came of Achilles' line and of his 
that shattered thy halls, Avernus, to witness that the 
censor's ordinance was ne'er relaxed for me and that 
my hearth ne'er blushed for sin of mine. Cornelia ne'er 
dimmed the lustre of such spoils of war ; nay, even in 
that great house she was a pattern to be followed. 

46 My life was changeless ; through all its days it 
knew no slander : 'twixt torch of marriage and torch 
of death ours was a life of high renown. The laws I 
followed sprang from pride of blood : 'twas nature gave 
me them, that no fear of judgment might lead me 
toward virtue. I care not who the judges be that pass 
stern sentence on me ; no woman shall be shamed by 
sitting at my side, not thou, Claudia, the peerless
servant of the tower- crowned goddess, that didst lay hold 
of the cable and move Cybelle's lagging image, nor 
thou 8 whose white linen robe showed that the hearth 
still lived, when Vesta demanded the fire thou hadst 
sworn to keep. Nor yet in aught have I wronged 
thee, sweet mother mine, Scribonia : what wouldst 
thou have me change save only my doom ? My 
mother's tears and the laments of Rome give glory 
to my name and mine ashes are championed by the 
grief of Caesar. Moaning he cries that in me his 
daughter had a worthy sister, and we saw that even 
a god may weep. 

61 Yet well did I merit the robe of honour, nor 
childless was the household whence I was snatched 
away. Thou, Lepidus, and thou, Paullus, are my 
comfort even in death ; in your bosom were mine 
eyelids closed. My brother also I saw twice throned 
in the curule chair, and 'twas in the very hour of 
rejoicing, when they chose him consul, that I his 
sister was rapt away. And thou, my daughter, born 
to be the mirror of thy father's censorship, see thou 
follow mine example and wed one and one only. 
My children, get you children also to be pillars of 
the house: I grudge not now to put forth in the 
boat of death, since so many of my blood shall 
add fresh lustre to my deeds. This is the supreme 
honour of a woman's triumph, that outspoken rumour 
should praise her dead ashes. 

73 And now to thee, Paullus, I commend our 
children, the common pledges of our love : this 
care yet lives deep-burned even into mine ashes. 
Father, 'tis thine to fill the mother's room ; thy 
neck alone must bear all my children's throng. 
When thou dost kiss their tears away, add thereto 
their mother's kisses; henceforth the whole house 
must be thy burden. And if thou must weep at 
all, weep when they are not by ; when they come to 
thee, cheat their kisses with tearless eye. Enough 
for thee, Paullus, be the nights thou wearest out 
with memories of me, enough the dreams wherein 
so oft thou thinkest to see my very self : and when 
in secret thou shalt speak unto mine image, breathe 
every word as though to one that should reply. 

85 Yet if another couch shall front the portals of 
our hall, and a wary stepdame usurp my bed, my 
sons, praise and endure your father's spouse ; your 
virtues shall win her heart to yield. Nor praise 
your mother overmuch : she will be angered if in 
unguarded speech ye compare her with her that was. 
Or if he forget me not, if my shade sufficeth him 
and he still doth prize mine ashes, learn even now to 
note how old age steals upon him, and leave no path 
for grief to assail his widowed heart. May the years 
that were snatched from me be added to your years ; 
thus may my children's presence sweeten old age 
for Paullus. Aye, and 'tis well : ne'er did I don a 
mother's mourning weeds ; all, all my children came 
to my graveside. 

99 My pleading is accomplished ; rise, ye my
witnesses that weep my loss, and wait Earth's kindly 
sentence that shall give the reward my life hath 
earned. Even heaven hath unbarred its gates to 
virtue ; may my merit win its guerdon and mine ashes 
be borne to dwell with my glorious ancestors. 
