I 

You ask me, from what source so oft I draw my songs 
of love and whence comes my book that sounds so 
soft upon the tongue. Tis not Calliope nor Apollo 
that sing these things ; 'tis my mistress' self that 
makes my wit. If thou wilt have her walk radiant 
in silks of Cos, of Coan raiment all this my book shall 
tell ; or have I seen her tresses stray dishevelled o'er 
her brow, I praise her locks and she walks abroad 
in pride and gladness; or struck she forth music 
from the lyre with ivory fingers, I marvel with what 
easy skill she sweeps her hands along the strings ; or 
when she droops those eyes that call for sleep I find 
a thousand new themes for song ; or if, flinging away 
her robe, she enter naked with me in the lists, then, 
then I write whole Iliads long. Whate'er she does, 
whate'er she says, from a mere nothing springs a 
mighty tale. 

17 But if, Maecenas, the Fates had granted me 
power to lead the hosts of heroes into war, I would 
not sing the Titans, nor Ossa on Olympus piled, that 
Pelion might be a path to heaven. I'd sing not ancient 
Thebes nor Troy's citadel, that is Homers glory, 
nor yet how at Xerxes' bidding sea met sundered 
sea, nor, again, would I chant the primeval realm 
of Remus or the fierce spirit of lofty Carthage, 
the Cimbrian's threats or the service wrought 
by Marius for the State. But I would tell of the 
wars and the deeds of thy master Caesar, and next 
after mighty Caesar my thoughts should turn on 
thee. For oft as I sang of Mutina or Philippi, where 
Romans lie by Romans slain, or of the sea-fight and 
the rout by the Sicilian shore, the ruined hearths of 
Etruria's ancient race, and the capture of the shore 
where Ptolemy's Pharos stands ; oft as I sang of 
Egypt and the Nile, what time in mourning garb he 
went humbly to Rome with his seven captive streams, 
or of the necks of kings bound about with chains of 
gold, and the prows of Actium speeding along the 
Sacred Way ; so oft would my Muse weave thy name 
into those deeds, true heart in peace or war. 
• • • • 
Theseus to the shades below, Achilles to the gods 
above, proclaim a comrade's love, the one of Ixion's 
child, the other of the son of Menoetius. 

39 But neither would Callimachus' scant breath avail 
to thunder forth the strife 'twixt Jove and Enceladus 
on Phlegra's plains, nor has my heart power in verse 
severe to trace the line of Caesar to his Phrygian
grandsires. The sailor talks of winds, the ploughman of oxen, 
the soldier counts o'er his wounds, the shepherd his 
sheep, while we for our part tell of lovers' wars upon 
a narrow couch ! Let each man pass his days in that 
wherein his skill is greatest. To die for love is glory ; 
and glory yet again to have power to joy in one love 
only ; ah, may I, and I alone, joy in the love that's 
mine. If memory fails me not, she is wont to blame 
fickle-hearted maids, and on account of Helen frowns 
on the whole Iliad. Though I be doomed to drink 
of the cup that the stepdame Phaedra brewed, the 
cup whereof her stepson was destined to take no 
hurt, or must die of Circe's herbs; or though for 
me the Colchian witch heat the caldron on the fires 
of Iolcus, yet since one girl hath stolen away my 
senses, from her house only shall go forth my' funeral 
train. 

57 Medicine cures all the anguish of mankind; 
love alone loves no physician of its ill. Machaon 
healed Philoctetes' limping feet, Chiron the son of 
Phillyra opened the eyes of Phoenix, the Epidaurian 
god restored the dead Androgeon to his father's 
hearth by power of Cretan herbs, and the Mysian 
youth received succour from the same Haemonian 
spear that dealt the wound. If any can take this 
frailty from me, he and he alone will be able to 
bring the apple to the hands of Tantalus ; he too 
shall fill the casks from the maidens' pitchers, that 
their tender necks be not bowed for ever by the 
burden of water; he too shall loose Prometheus' 
arms from the Caucasian crag and drive the vulture 
from his inmost heart. 

71 Therefore when at last the Fates demand my 
life, and I shall be no more than%a brief name on a 
little stone of marble, then, Maecenas, thou hope 
and envy of our Roman youth, and, whether I live or 
die, mine own true glory, if perchance thy journeying 
lead thee near my tomb, stay awhile thy British 
chariot with carven yoke, and weeping pay this tribute 
to the silent dust : " An unrelenting maid wrought 
this poor mortal's death." 


II 

I was free and thought henceforth to lie alone of 
nights ; but though the truce was made, Love played 
me false. Why abides such mortal beauty upon 
earth ? Jupiter, I pardon thy gallantries of olden 
time. Yellow is her hair, and tapering her hands, 
tall and full her figure, and stately her walk, worthy 
the sister of Jove or like to Pallas, when she 
strides to Dulichian altars, her breast veiled by the 
Gorgons' snaky locks. Fair is she as Ischomache, 
heroic child of the Lapithae, the Centaurs' welcome 
spoil in the revel's midst, or as Brimo when by the 
sacred waters of Boebeis she laid her virgin body at 
Mercury's side. Yield now, ye goddesses, whom of 
old the shepherd saw lay aside your raiment on the 
heights of Ida ! And oh ! may old age never mar 
that face, though she reach the years of the Cumaean 
prophetess. 


III 

Thou, that didst boast that nought could harm thee 
more, art caught in the snare : thy proud spirit has 
fallen. Scarce, poor wretch, canst thou find rest for a 
single month, and now a second book of shame shall 
tell of thy doings. I was as one that seeks whether 
a fish may live on the dry sands, or a fierce wild 
boar in the midst of unfamiliar waves, when I tried 
if I could pass the night in sterner studies. Love is 
but put off, extinguished never. 

9 'Twas not her face, bright though it be, that 
won me. Lilies would not surpass my mistress for 
whiteness ; 'tis as though Maeotic snows were to 
strive with Spanish vermilion, or rose-leaves floated 
amid stainless milk. 'Twas not her hair flowing 
trimly o'er her smooth neck, 'twas not the twin 
torches of her eyes, my lodestars, nor a girl shining 
in Arabian silks : not for such trifles as these am I 
a gallant lover ! 'Tis rather that at the revel's close 
she dances wondrously, even as Ariadne led the 
Maenad dance ; 'tis rather that when she essays to 
sing to the Aeolian lyre she rivals the harp of 
Aganippe in her skill to play, and challenges with 
her verse the writings of ancient Corinna, and counts 
not Erinna's songs the equals of her own. 

23 My life, did not bright Love sneeze a shrill 
omen at thine hour of birth, when day first dawned 
for thee ? These heavenly gifts the gods, the gods 
bestowed, for I would not have thee think that 'twas 
thy mother gave them. Such boons no human 
parentage can confer, those charms ne'er sprang 
from mortal womb. Thou and thou only wast 
born to be the glory of Roman maids ; thou shalt be 
the first maid of Rome to lie with Jove, nor shalt 
thou forever in our midst visit mortal couches. 
Helen wore this beauty once, and now 'tis come to 
earth again with thee. 

83 For thee then that our youth should burn, why 
should I wonder now ? Better, O Troy, to have 
perished for Cynthia's sake. Of old I wondered that 
a girl should have been the cause of so mighty a 
conflict before the citadel of Troy, where Europe and 
Asia met in war. Now, Paris, I hold that thou, and 
thou, Menelaus, wert wise, thou that thou didst 
demand, thou that thou wert slow to reply. Worthy 
in sooth was such a face, that for it even Achilles 
should face death ; even Priam could not but approve 
such cause for strife. If any desire to surpass the 
fame of all ancient pictures, let him take my mistress 
as model for his art ; if he show her to the peoples 
of the West or to the peoples of the East, he will set 
the East and set the West afire. 

45 These bounds at least let me never more out- 
step ! Or if I do, let another passion smite me, if 
such there be, that shall burn me with keener agony. 
As at first the ox refuses the plough, yet at length 
becomes familiar to the yoke and goes quietly to the 
fields, so do proud youths fret in the first ecstasy of 
love, then, calmer grown, bear good and ill alike. 
Melampus the seer endured dishonouring fetters, 
convicted of having stolen the kine of Iphiclus : yet 
'twas not gain, but rather the fair face of Pero
compelled him, Pero soon to be a bride in the halls of 
Amythaon. 


IV 

Oft first must thou bemoan the transgressions of thy 
mistress, oft must thou ask a boon, and oft depart 
denied. Oft must thou bite thy nails for wrath at 
thine unmerited woe, and in anger stamp the ground 
with hesitating foot. 

5 In vain was my hair drenched with perfumes, in 
vain my feet went lingeringly with measured step. 
For such a case as mine avails no drug, no Colchian 
sorceress of the night, no, nor the herbs Perimede's 
hands distilled. For here we see no cause nor whence 
the blow is dealt ; dark is the path whereby so many 
griefs come none the less. In such a case the sick 
man needs no physician, no soft pillows; him no 
inclement season, no wind of heaven racks : he walks 
abroad, and on a sudden his friends marvel to see him 
dead. Whate'er love be, 'tis a strange thing, that 
none may guard against. For what lying seer have I 
not rewarded ? What hag has not three times three 
pondered my dreams ? 

17 Let my enemies love women, my friends have 
their delight in a boy. For then thou descendest 
the tranquil stream in unimperilled bark. How can 
the waves of such a tiny shore do thee hurt ? His 
heart is oft softened by a single word ; she will scarce 
be appeased even by thy blood. 


V 

Is this true, Cynthia, that through all Rome thy name 
is a byword, and that thou livest in open wantonness ? 
Did I deserve to look for this ? Faithless one, I will 
punish thee, and the wind shall bear me, Cynthia, to 
some other haven. Though all womankind be deceitful,
yet out of so many I shall find one that will be 
glad to be made famous by my song, that will not 
with heart hard as thine heap insult on my head, 
but will revile thy name. Alas ! loved for so long, 
too late will fall thy tears ! 

9 Now is mine anger fresh, now is the time to part 
from thee : when the smart is over, believe me, love 
will return. Not so swiftly do the Carpathian waves 
change their hue beneath the North Wind's blasts, 
not so swiftly veers the dark storm-cloud before the 
South- West's shifting gale, as one word will lightly 
change the wrath of lovers. While yet thou mayst, 
Propertius, withdraw thy neck from the unjust yoke. 
Somewhat wilt thou suffer, but only on the first night ; 
so but thou wilt endure, all love's ills are light. 

17 But oh ! by the sweet laws of our mistress Juno 
do thou, my life, spare by thy waywardness to harm 
thyself. Not only the bull strikes at its foe with 
curved horn; even the ewe when hurt resists the 
aggressor. I will not, rend thy raiment from thy 
faithless limbs, nor shall my anger break down the 
doors thou barrest against me ; I would not venture 
in my wrath to tear thy plaited tresses, nor bruise 
thee with cruel fist. Let some boor seek combats 
base as this, around whose head the ivy ne'er hath 
twined. I will but write words, that thy lifetime 
shall not see effaced : " Cynthia, mighty is thy beauty ; 
Cynthia, light are thy words." Believe me, though 
thou spurn the whisper of scandal, this verse will 
drive the colour from thy cheek. 


VI 

Not so was the house of Ephyrean Lais thronged, 
at whose doors all Greece lay bowed ; nor even did 
Menander's Thais, the darling of the folk of Athens, 
gather about her such a swarm of gallants; nor 
Phryne, who might have restored the ruined walls of 
Thebes, so many a lover had brought her riches. 

7 Aye, and oft thou feign'st false kindred and 
lackest not those that have a right to kiss thee. 
Jealous am I of the very portraits, the very names of 
young men, even of the tender boy in the cradle 
that knows not how to speak. Jealous shall I be 
of thy mother if she gives thee many a kiss, of thy 
sister and of the friend that may chance to sleep with 
thee. All things will awake my fears ; I am a coward 
(pardon my cowardice), and beneath the woman's 
dress I, poor fool, suspect the presence of a man. 

15 'Twas by reason of such jealousies that of old, as 
the story goes, the world went forth to battle ; such 
was the beginning of the slaughter before Troy. The 
same madness bade the Centaurs break embossed 
goblets in conflict against Pirithous. Why should I 
seek examples from the tales of Greece? Thou, 
Romulus, nurtured by the milk of the cruel she-wolf, 
didst give warrant for the crime ; thou taughtest thy 
Romans to ravish unpunished the Sabine maids ; thou 
art the cause that now there is naught Love dare not 
do at Rome. Happy was the wife of Admetus, happy 
the partner of Ulysses' bed, and every woman that 
loves her husband's home. 

26 What profits it for maids to found temples in 
honour of Chastity, if every bride is permitted to be 
whate'er she will ? The hand that first painted lewd 
pictures, and set up objects foul to view in chaste 
homes, first corrupted the unsullied eyes of maids 
and refused to allow them to be ignorant of its own 
wantonness. May he groan in torment who by his 
vile art first wakened strife 'twixt lovers, strife 
lurking secret under silent joy ! Not with such 
figures did men of old adorn their houses ; then their 
walls had no foul deeds painted on them. But 
deservedly have cobwebs gathered o'er the temples 
and rank herbage has overgrown the neglected gods. 

37 What guardians then, what limits shall I set 
thee, thresholds o'er which no enemy's foot shall 
ever pass ? For no stern guardian can save her that 
will not be saved : she alone is surely guarded, my 
Cynthia, who is ashamed to sin. As for me, no wife 
nor mistress shall ever steal me from thee ; for me 
thou shalt at once be mistress and wife. 



VII 

In very truth Cynthia rejoiced when that law was 
swept away, at the making of which we both wept 
for many an hour, for fear it should divide us : though 
against their will not Jove himself could part a pair 

l The reason seems to be that the contemplation of such 
pictures, though it may give silent pleasure, yet contains in 
germ the severance of lovers through infidelity. 
of lovers. " Nay " say you, " but Caesar is mighty." 
True, but his might is the might of armies : to have 
vanquished nations counts for nothing in the world 
of love. For sooner would I suffer my head to be 
severed from my body than I could quench the fire 
of our passion at the whim of a bride, or, a wedded 
husband, pass thy house forever barred to me, and 
glance back with streaming eyes at the threshold I 
had betrayed. Ah ! then of what slumbers would 
the pipe of the wedding company sing to thee, that 
pipe more sadly sounding than the trump of funeral ! 

13 How should I furnish children to swell our 
country's triumphs ? From my blood shall no soldier 
ever spring. But if I were to follow my mistress' camp 
(the one true camp for me !), not mighty enough for me 
were Castors war-horse. 'Twas in Love's warfare that 
my fame won such renown, fame that has travelled to 
the wintry Borysthenidae. Thou only pleasest me ; 
let me in like manner, Cynthia, be thy only pleasure : 
love such as this will be worth more to me than the 
name of father. 


VIII 

The girl I loved so long is being torn from my 
arms, and dost thou, my friend, forbid me to weep ? 
No enmities are bitter save those of love ; slay me 
if thou wilt, and my hatred shall be milder far. Can 
I bear to behold her reclined on another's arm? 
Shall she no more be called "mine," that was 
"mine" so lately? All things change: and loves 
not least ; conqueror thou art or conquered ; so 
turns the wheel of love. Oft have leaders and lords 
of might fallen ; Thebes stood of old and lofty Troy 
once was. What gifts I gave her, what songs I made 
for her ! Yet never did she soften her iron heart 
nor say, " I love thee." 


VIIIa 

So then, have I, that through so many years too 
rashly have endured thee and thy household, cruel 
girl, have I ever seemed to thee aught save thy 
slave ? Or wilt thou never cease to hurl words of 
scorn at me ? 

17 So then, Propertius, must thou die in thine 
earliest youth ? Nay, die ! let her rejoice to see thee 
perish ! Let her harry my ghost, and vex my shade, let 
her trample on my pyre and spurn my bones ! [Why ? 
Did not Boeotian Haemon die by Antigone's tomb, 
his side rent by his own sword, and mingle his bones 
with those of the hapless maid, without whom he 
would not return to his Theban home ?] But thou 
shalt not escape ; thou must die with me, on this same 
steel must drip the blood of both ! Such death shall 
be for me a death of shame ; but, shameful though 
it be, thou still shalt die. 

29 Even the great Achilles when left forlorn, his 
love snatched from his side, endured that his arms 
should lie idle in his tent. He saw the rout, the 
Achaeans dragged along the shore, he saw the Dorian 
camp glow with the torch of Hector, he saw Patroclus 
lie low defiled with clotted sand, his streaming hair 
dabbled with blood ; and all this he endured for the 
sake of the lovely Briseis. Such is the force and 
fierceness of grief when love is stolen away. But 
when with tardy retribution his captive was restored 
to him, it was the same Achilles dragged brave 
Hector at the heels of his Haemonian steeds. What 
wonder then if Love rightfully triumphs over me, 
that have neither mother nor armour like to his ? 


IX 

What yonder fool now is, I often was. Yet one day, 
it may be, he too shall be cast forth and another 
dearer to thy heart. 

3 Penelope was able to live true to her vows for 
twice ten years, a woman worthy to be wooed of so 
many suitors ; she was able to put off her marriage by 
her false weaving, in crafty wise, unravelling by night 
the weft of the day, and though she ne'er hoped to 
look on Ulysses' face again, she remained faithful in 
his house, grown old in waiting his return. Briseis 
too, one arm about her dead Achilles, beat her fair 
cheeks with frenzied hand, and, captive as she was, 
with weeping washed the bloodstained corpse of her 
lord and master, where she had laid him in the 
yellow shallows of Simois; she cast ashes on her 
hair, and her small hand sufficed to hold the body 
and mighty bones of the great Achilles. For in that 
day, Achilles, neither Peleus nor thy sea-born mother, 
nor Scyrian Deidamia, whom thou leftest widowed, 
were by thy side. 

17 Thus in those days Greece was glad of her true 
children ; then even in the camp did modesty flourish. 
But thou, impious one, couldst not forego the joys of 
even one night, couldst not abide alone for even one 
day. Nay, more, ye twain laughed loud over the 
wine-cup, and perchance spake evil words of me. 
And this man whom thou seekest is even he that first 
left thee of old. God grant thee joy of such a mate, 
deluded girl ! 

26 Is this the end of the vows I made for thy safety, 
when the waves of Styx had all but whelmed thy head, 
and round about thy bed we, thy friends, stood and 
wept ? Where then was this lover of thine, O God, 
or what cared he ? 

29 What wouldst thou do were I a soldier, kept 
far hence in distant Ind, or if my bark were moored 
in the western ocean ? But 'tis easy for you to 
contrive false tales and deceits. This art alone has 
woman ne'er failed to learn. Not so swiftly do the 
Syrtes change before the veering gale, nor the 
leaves tremble before the wintry South Wind, but 
swifter far is plighted faith forgot in a woman's 
anger, be the cause grave or light. 

37 But now, since thou hast chosen this for thy path, 
I will yield. Bring forth, ye loves, yet sharper arrows, 
and vying with one another pierce my heart and let 
the vital spirit free. Great glory shall my life-blood 
bring ye ! The stars are witness and the morning 
frost, and the door that stealthily oped to let me in, 
that there ne'er was aught in life more dear to my 
heart than thou ; and thus I'll love thee still, though 
thou art so unkind. No mistress ever shall come 
into my bed ; alone will I live, since thine I may not 
be. And oh, if perchance my life hath been spent 
in true service of the gods, may thy mate in the mid- 
course of passion become a stone. 

49 In no more deadly strife did the Theban
chieftains fight and fall to win a throne, while in their 
midst their mother strove to part them ; nor from 
such death would I shrink, not though Cynthia strove 
to part us, if only so thou also mightest die. 


X 

But now 'tis time with other measures to range the 
slopes of Helicon ; 'tis time to launch the Haemonian 
steed o'er the open plain ; now would I sing of hosts 
brave in battle and tell of my chieftain's Roman 
camp. But should strength fail me, yet my daring 
shall win me fame : in mighty enterprises enough 
even to have willed success. Let early youth sing 
the charms of love, life's later prime the storm of 
war : war will I sing, now that I have set forth all 
my mistress' charms. Now would I go my way with 
grave frown stamped on serious brow ; my Muse 
now bids me strike another lyre. Awake, my soul ! 
Ye Pierid maids, leave these humble strains and 
take a stronger tone ; the work that waits you needs 
a mighty voice. 

13 Now does Euphrates deny that the Parthian 
aims his backward shaft, and grieves that ever he 
cut short the return of the Crassi. Nay, even India, 
Augustus, bows her neck to grace thy triumph, and 
the house of virgin Arabia trembles before thee ; and 
if there be any land withdrawn upon earth's furthest 
rim, captured hereafter let it feel thy mighty hand. 

19 This be the camp I follow. Great will I be 
among singers by singing of thy wars. Let destiny 
keep that glorious day in store for me. 

21 As when we cannot reach the head of some tall 
statue, our garland is laid thus humbly before its 
feet, so now, too weak to climb to the heights of thy 
glory's song, with lowly rite we give thee the incense 
of the poor. Not yet have my songs come to know 
the founts of Ascra ; Love has but dipped them in 
Permessus' stream.


XI 

Let others write of thee ; or be thou all unknown. 
Let him praise thee that will sow his harvest in a 
barren soil : all thy endowments, believe me, the 
last dark hour of funeral shall consume with thee on 
the selfsame bier, and the traveller shall spurn thine 
ashes as he passes by, nor ever say : " This dust was 
once a learned maid." 


XII 

Whoe'er he was first painted Love in likeness of a 
boy, think'st thou not his hands had wondrous skill ? 
He first saw that there is no wisdom in the lives of 
lovers, and that mighty blessings are lost through 
petty cares. He too with good reason gave him 
windy wings, and made him flit about the hearts of 
men; for of a truth we are ever tossed upon a 
shifting sea, and our breeze abides never in the same 
quarter. Rightly too is Love's hand armed with 
barbed arrows, and the Cnossian quiver hangs from 
his shoulders twain; for he strikes e'er from our 
fancied safety we may see the foe, nor does any go 
scatheless from the wound he deals. 

18 In me his darts stick fast, for me he still wears 
the form of a boy; but of a truth he has lost his 
wings, for nowhither, alas ! flies he forth from my 
bosom, and tireless he wages war within my blood. 

17 What delight hast thou to dwell in this withered 
heart of mine ? If thou hast aught of shame, elsewhere
transfer thy warfare. Better far to assail those 
that have never felt the power of thy venomed shaft. 
'Tis not I, but my wasted shadow, thou smitest : yet, 
if thou destroy me utterly, where wilt thou find one 
to chant such strains as these ? (Slight though my 
Muse be, yet 'tis thy great renown.) Where wilt 
thou find one to sing the face, the hands, the dark 
eyes of my beloved, and how soft her footsteps 
fall? 


XIII 

Not with so many Persian shafts is Erythra armed 
as the darts that Love hath planted in my breast. 
'Twas he forbade me to despise the trivial Muse and 
commanded me to dwell thus in the grove of Ascra ; 
not in such wise that the Pierian oaks should follow 
my words, or that I should lead the wild beasts after 
me down Ismarus' vale, but rather that Cynthia 
should marvel at my verse. Thus should I win more 
fame than Inachian Linus. 

9 I marvel not only at comeliness of form, nor if 
a woman boasts glorious ancestry. Be it rather my 
joy to have read my verse as I lay in the arms of a 
learned maid and to have pleased her pure ears with 
what I write. When such bliss hath fallen to my lot, 
farewell the confused talk of the people ; I will rest 
secure in the judgment of my mistress. If only she 
chance to turn her thoughts toward peace and hear 
me kindly, though Jove be angry, I can bear his 
wrath.


XIIIa 

Wherefore, Cynthia, when at last death shall seal 
my eyes, hear thou the order of my funeral. For me 
let no procession walk with long array of masks, 
let no trumpet make vain wailing for my end. Let 
no last bed on posts of ivory be strewn for me, let not 
my dead body lie on a couch of cloth-of-gold ; no 
line of attendants with sweet-scented platters for me, 
only the humble obsequies that mark a poor man's 
death. 

26 Costly enough shall be my funeral train if three 
little books go with me to the grave, that I may bear 
them to Persephone as my most precious offering. 
And thou shalt follow, thy breast all bare and torn, 
nor shalt thou weary of calling upon my name, but 
shalt imprint the last kiss upon my clay-cold lips, 
when the casket of onyx with its gift of Syrian nard 
is bestowed upon me. Then when the fire beneath 
hath burned me to an ash, let a tiny earthen urn 
receive my ghost, and over my little tomb let a laurel 
be planted to o'ershade the spot, where the fire of 
death hath ceased to burn ; and thereon be these 
two verses : he that now lies naught but unlovely 

DUST, ONCE SERVED ONE LOVE AND ONE LOVE ONLY. 

87 So shall the fame of my sepulchre be blazoned 
abroad no less than the bloody tomb of the Phthian 
hero. And whene'er thou too shalt come to thy 
death, do thou come gray-haired by the old path to 
the stones that guard my memory. Meanwhile see 
thou despise me not in my tomb. Not all unconscious
and witless of the truth are the ashes of man. 

43 And ah ! would that any one of the three Sisters 
had ordained that I should die, while yet I lay in the 
cradle. For to what end is man's breath kept whole 
in him, breath that any moment may cease to be? 
Not till three generations of men had past away 
were Nestor's ashes seen: yet had some Phrygian 
warrior from the ramparts of Troy cut short the long- 
drawn doom of his old age, he ne'er had seen the body 
of Antilochus laid in earthy nor cried aloud : " O death ! 
why tarriest thou so late e»er thou come to me ? " 

51 Yet thou, when thou hast lost thy friend, wilt 
sometimes weep for him; undying Jove is the due 
of the loved and lost. Witness the cruel boar that 
struck snow-white Adonis as he limited on the 
Idalian peak. There in the marsh, 'tis said, he lay 
in his beauty ; thither, 'tis said, thou wen test, Venus, 
thy tresses unbound. But in vain, Cynthia, shalt thou 
recall my voiceless shade to life ; for what answer shall 
my crumbled bones have strength to make ? 


XIV 

Not so did Atrides rejoice in his triumph over 
Troy, when the vast wealth of Laomedon fell in 
ruin ; not so glad was Ulysses, when, his wanderings 
o'er, he reached the shore of his beloved Dulichia ; 
not so happy Electra, when she saw Orestes safe and 
sound, o'er whose feigned ashes she had wept, 
clasping them to her heart ; not with such joy did 
the daughter of Minos behold Theseus come forth 
unscathed, when the guiding thread led him through 
the Daedalian maze. All their gladness was naught, 
compared with the joys that were mine last night. 
Come such another night, and I shall be immortal ! 
(Yet when I went my way a suppliant with drooping 
head she spoke of me as more worthless than a pool 
run dry.) No more does she meet me with cruel 
disdain, no more can she sit unmoved at the voice 
of my complaint. 

15 And would that her terms of peace had not been 
made known to me so late ! To dust and ashes now 
this healing is given. The way shone clear before 
my feet ; but men love-maddened one and all are 
blind. 

19 This I have found to be the sovereign cure: 
lovers, disdain your loves ! So, if she have refused 
you yesterday, she will come to your arms to-day. 
Others in vain beat at my mistress' door and called 
her by name ; but unmoved she laid her head upon 
my breast. Dearer to me this victory than the 
conquest of Parthia : be these my spoils, my captive 
kings, my triumphal car. Rich offerings, Cytherea, 
will I fix on the pillars of thy shrine, and such shall 
be the verse beneath my name : these spoils, o 

GODDESS, I PROPERTIUS HANG BEFORE THY SHRINE ; FOR 
ONE WHOLE NIGHT LONG MY MISTRESS TOOK ME TO HER 

heart. Now, Cynthia, shall my bark come safe home 
to thee — or is it doomed to sink with all its wares 
in shoal-water? Nay, if thou change toward me 
through any fault of mine, may I lie dead before thy 
threshold ! 


XV 

How happy is my lot ! O night that was not dark 
for me ! and thou beloved couch blessed by my 
delight ! How many sweet words we interchanged 
while the lamp was by, and how we strove together 
when the light was gone ! For now she struggled 
with me with breasts uncovered, now veiling herself 
•in her tunic checked my advance. With a kiss she 
unsealed mine eyes weighed down with slumber and 
said : " Dost thou lie thus, thou sluggard ? " How 
oft we shifted our arms and varied our embrace ; how 
long my kisses lingered on thy lips ! 

11 There is no joy in spoiling love's delights by 
sightless motion : know, if thou knowest it not, that 
in love the eyes are guides. Paris himself is said to 
have been undone by love when he saw the Spartan 
naked, as she rose from the couch of Menelaus. 
Naked was Endymion when he impassioned Phoebus' 
sister, and naked they say he lay with the naked 
goddess. 

17 But if thou hardenest thine heart and wilt lie 
clothed, thou shalt have thy raiment rent and feel 
the violence of my hands. Nay more, if anger carry 
me further yet, thou shalt show thy mother how 
thine arms are bruised. Not yet do drooping breasts 
forbid thee to make merry ; that be her care that hath 
borne a child and counts it shame. While the Fates 
grant it, let us glut our eyes with love : the long 
night hasteneth on for thee that knows no dawning. 
And oh ! that thou wouldst bind us in this embrace 
with such a chain that never the day might come to 
break its power ! Be doves thine example : they are 
yoked together in love, male and female made one 
by passion. He errs that seeks to set a term to the 
frenzy of love ; true love hath no bound. Sooner 
will earth mock the ploughman by bearing fruit out 
of season, and the Sun-god drive the steeds of night, 
rivers begin to recall their waters to their fount, the 
deep dry up and leave its fish athirst, than I shall 
be able to transfer to another my love with all its 
woe ; hers will I be in life and hers in death. 

37 But if she be willing again to grant me such 
nights as last, one year will be long life for me. If 
she give me many, they will make me immortal ; 
one such night might make any man a god ! 

41 Ah ! if all men desired to pass their life as I, 
and lie with limbs weighed down by deep draughts 
of wine, nor cruel steel would there be nor ships of 
war, nor would our bones be tossed in the deep of 
Actium ; nor would Rome, so oft beleaguered with 
triumphs o'er her own kin, be weary of tearing her 
hair for grief. This at least shall those that come 
after be able to praise in us : our wine-cups never 
outraged any god. 

49 Cynthia, do thou only while the light is yet 
with thee forsake not the joy of life ! Give me all 
thy kisses, yet shall they be all too few ; and as 
leaves drop from withered wreaths and thou mayst 
see them bestrew the cups and float therein, so we 
that love and whose hopes are high perchance shall 
find to-morrow close our doom. 


XVI 

Of late, Cynthia, a praetor came from the land of 
Illyria, to thee the hugest plunder, to me the hugest 
care. Could he not have lost his life by the Ceraunian 
rocks ? Ah, Neptune, what gifts would I have given 
thee ! 

6 Now feasts are spread on laden tables, and I am 
not there ! Now all night long thy door stands open, 
but not for me ! Wherefore, if thou art wise, neglect 
not the harvest offered thee and pluck thy stolid beast, 
while yet his fleece is whole ! Then when his gifts are 
spent and he left poor, bid him set sail again to fresh 
Illyrias. 

11 Cynthia follows not the rods of office, cares 
naught for honours ; her lovers' purse she ever 
weighs as none other can. But do thou, Venus, aid 
me in my grief ; let his insatiate lusts break all his 
strength. 

15 So then shall any stranger purchase her love with 
gifts ? Jove ! 'tis an unworthy thing that such traffic 
should have power to corrupt the heart of woman. 
Ever she sends me to the marge of ocean to seek 
her gems, and bids me bring gifts from Tyre itself. 
Would that no men at Rome were wealthy and that 
our lord and master himself dwelt in a thatched 
cottage. Never then would one's mistress sell 
herself for a gift, but girls would grow grey in the 
house of one only lover. Never wouldst thou lie far 
from me for seven nights long, thy white arms lapped 
about so foul a lover ; nor dost thou thus because I 
have sinned — to that I call thee to testify — but 
because the fair are ever faithless. 

27 A barbarian shut out from bliss stamps at thy 
door, and lo ! of a sudden a blessing falls on him and 
now he rules where I once reigned supreme. 

29 See what bitter woe gifts brought to Eriphyla, 
and in what agony the bride Creusa burned ! Will all 
the wrong thou dost me ne'er assuage my tears ? or 
must this grief of mine attend thy sins for ever ? So 
many days have past away since the theatre and the 
Campus lost all charms for me, and my table ceased 
to please. Yet truly shame, yea, shame should set 
me free ! But, perchance, as men say, dishonourable 
love is ever deaf. Behold the chief, who of late 
filled the waves of Actium with the fruitless groaning 
of the soldiers he dragged down to death ! 'Twas 
infamous love bade him wheel his ships and turn his 
back to the foe and seek flight in the utmost bounds of 
earth. This is Caesar's claim to virtue, this Caesar s 
claim to glory ; the hand that conquered sheathed 
the sword in peace. 

43 But, oh that I may see all his gifts, the fine 
raiment, the emeralds and the yellow-gleaming 
chrysolite, borne by swift storms into empty space ; 
may they become vile earth or water in thy hands ! 
Not always does Jove calmly laugh at lovers' perjuries 
and turn a deaf ear to prayer. Thou hast perceived 
the thunderclap run through all the sky, and the 
levin bolt leap from its airy home. 'Tis neither 
the Pleiades nor dark Orion that bring these things 
to pass ; 'tis not for nothing that the wrath of the 
lightning falls. Tis then that Jove is wont to punish 
faithless girls, since he also once wept for a woman's 
treachery. Wherefore count not thy Sidonian 
raiment worth the terror thou must feel whene'er 
the South Wind rolls up clouds of storm. 


XVII 

To make a false tryst for a night, to beguile a lover 
with promises, why, 'tis to have his blood upon thy 
hands. These sorrows do I sing, as oft as I pass 
lonely nights of bitterness, anguished to think of 
how thou liest, and how I. 

5 Be thou smitten with compassion for the fate of 
Tantalus at the waterside, when thou seest how the 
water sinks from his parched mouth and mocks his 
thirst; or marvel at the toil of Sisyphus, how he 
rolls his stubborn burden up all the mountain slope ; 
yet know that there is naught on earth more suffering 
than a lover, nor aught a wise man would less wish 
to be. I who was once accounted happy, I whom 
men envied and admired, I now have entry scarce 
every tenth day. Now gladly, impious maid, would 
I cast myself from some hard rock or take distilled 
poison into my hands. No more can I lie in the 
streets beneath the cold, clear moon nor cry my words 
through the chinks of thy door ! 

17 Yet though these things be so, I will have a care 
not to change my mistress ; then will she weep, when 
she feels that I am true. 


XVIII 

Continued complainings beget disgust in many a 
heart ; oft doth a silent lover bend a woman's will. 
If aught thou hast espied, deny thou sawest aught, 
or if aught perchance hath pained thee deny the 
pain ! 


XVIIIa 

What if my youthful prime were white with the 
white hair of eld, and drooping wrinkles furrowed 
my cheeks ? 

7 Tithonus was old, yet Aurora despised him not, 
nor suffered him to lie lonely in the chambers of the 
East. Oft as she departed did she caress him amid 
the waves where she hath her home, or ever turning 
to her task she washed her yoked steeds, and when 
nigh Ind she laid her down to rest in his embrace she 
made moan that day returned too soon. As she 
climbed her car she cried, "High heaven is
unkind," and offered unwilling service to the world. 
Deeper her joy, while old Tithonus lived, than heavy 
her grief when Memnon perished. So fair a maid as 
she had no shame to sleep beside an aged man; nor 
to heap kisses on his hoary locks. 

19 But thou, faithless, hatest me for all my youth, 
though thyself at no far distant day shalt be a 
stooping crone. Still my care grows less when I 
remember that Cupid oft frowns on him to whom 
of old he was so kind. 


XVIIIb 

Even now, mad girl, dost ape the painted Briton 
and wanton with foreign dyes upon thy cheek? 
Beauty is ever best as nature made it ; foul shows 
the Belgian rouge on Roman cheeks. May many 
an ill befall the maid in hell, that in her folly dyes 
her hair with lying hue. Away with these things ! 
I at least shall find thee fair ; fair enough art thou 
to me if only thou visit me often. If one stain her 
brows with azure dye, does that make azured beauty 
fair ? 

33 Thou hast no brother nor any son, wherefore 
let me and me alone be to thee at once both 
brother and son. Let thine own bed ever keep thee 
safe from scandal, nor sit thou with face too much 
adorned. I shall believe tales that rumour tells 
of thee ; therefore sin not ; scandal o'erleaps the 
bounds of land and sea. 


XIX 

Though, Cynthia, 'tis against my will that thou 
departest from Rome, glad am I that 'tis in the 
country far from paths of man thou dwellest
without me. In those chaste fields thou shalt find no 
seductive youth whose flatteries shall not permit 
thee to be honest, nor shall any brawl arise before 
thy windows, nor shall thy slumber be made bitter 
by cries upon thy name. Lone shalt thou dwell and 
on lone mountains gaze, on flocks and the lands of 
poor farmers. There will no games have power to 
corrupt thee, no temples, most frequent cause of all 
thy sins ; there shalt thou behold the tireless oxen 
plough, and the vine lay aside her foliage at the 
sickle's skilful touch, and there shalt thou bear 
a scanty offering of incense to some rude shrine, 
where the kid shall fall before a rustic altar; then 
bare-legged shalt thou imitate the country dance, if 
only there be no danger from the espial of some 
town-bred man. 

17 I myself will hunt; now straightway 'tis my 
joy to perform sacrifice to Diana, my vows to Venus 
laid aside. I will begin to snare wild beasts, to nail 
trophies of horns to the pine-tree, and with mine 
own voice urge on the bold hounds: yet would I 
never dare to assail the lion fell, or with speedy 
foot go face the wild boar of the field. Daring 
enough for me to catch the timid hare, or pierce 
birds with arrows from the quiver, where Clitumnus 
shrouds his fair streams in his own beloved grove, 
and with his waters laves the snow-white kine. 

27 Do thou, my love, oft as thou meditatest aught, 
remember that I shall be with thee in a few more 
dawns. So as thou rememberest this, neither the 
lonely woods nor the wandering streams upon the 
mossy hills can stay me from repeating thy name 
with tireless tongue; for one and all are ready to 
wrong an absent lover. 


XX 

Why weepst thou more bitterly than Briseis torn 
from Achilles' side ? Why weepst with anxious eyes 
more sadly than captive Andromache ? Or why, mad 
girl, weariest thou the ears of the gods with complaint 
of my perfidy ? Why moanest thou that my loyalty 
to thee has sunk so low? Not so shrilly does the 
mourning bird of Attica make her moan embowered 
in Cecropian leafage, not so does proud Niobe 
by twice six tombs stream tears down sorrowing 
Sipylus. 

9 Though my arms were bound with gyves of 
bronze, though my limbs were immured in Danae's 
tower, yet for thy sake, my life, would I break bonds 
of brass and leap o'er the iron walls of Danae's tower. 
My ears are deaf to all men say of thee ; only do thou 
likewise doubt not my steadfastness. By my mother's, 
by my father's bones I swear — if I lie, may either 
ghost take vengeance on me ! — that I will abide true 
to thee, ray life, until darkness close my day ; one 
selfsame love, one selfsame hour, shall sweep us both 
away.

19 But if neither the glory of thy name nor thy 
beauty kept me true, yet would the mildness of thy 
yoke do so. The seventh full moon has spun its course 
since every street corner hath been speaking of me 
and thee, and all this time not seldom hath thy door 
been kind, not seldom have I been admitted to thy 
bed. Yet not a night have I bought with sumptuous 
gifts ; whate'er I have been in thine eyes, I owe to 
thy goodwill ; great is my debt. Many sought thee, 
but thou hast sought me only ; can I forget the 
kindness of thy nature ? If I do, may ye, Furies of 
tragedy, plague me, and thou, Aeacus, pass on me the 
doom of hell. May my penalty be one of Tityus' 
ranging vultures, and may I carry rocks with labour 
worthy Sisyphus. 

33 But do thou beseech me no more with suppliant 
tablets : my loyalty shall be at the close what it was 
when it began. Herein forever am I justified : alone 
of lovers I neither rashly begin nor rashly end my 
love. 


XXI 

Ah, deep as the falsehoods Panthus has told thee of 
me be Venus' displeasure against Panthus. Yet,
today thou deemst me a prophet truer than Dodona's 
shrine. That goodly lover of thine hath taken him 
a wife ! Have so many nights been spent in vain ? 
Hast thou no shame ? See, he is free and sings for 
joy ; thou once too credulous now liest lonely ; and 
now the twain speak amongst themselves of thee ; 
he scornfully says that thou oft didst visit his house 
against his will. May I perish if he aims at aught 
else than to triumph for his conquest of thee : such 
is the praise that he the husband wins. 

11 So of old the stranger Jason deceived the maid 
of Colchis : she was cast forth from her home, for 
Creusa held her room. So was Calypso tricked by 
the Dulichian youth : she saw her lover spread his 
sails for flight. Ye maids, o'erprone to lend an ear 
to lovers, learn, left forlorn, not rashly to be kind. 

17 Yet for days thou hast been seeking another, who 
shall be faithful ! Fool, the lesson thou hadst from 
the first should have taught thee caution ! My heart, 
where'er I be, whate'er the hour, in sickness and in 
health, is with thee still. 


XXII 

Thou knowst that yesterday many a beauty pleased 
my impartial eyes ; thou knowst, Demophoon, that 
thence springs many an ill for me. No street is 
there that my feet range in vain. Alas! the 
theatre was made too oft to be my doom, whether 
some beauty spreads out white arms with voluptuous
motion, or pours from her lips a varied strain 
of song. And all the while mine eyes seek their 
own hurt, if some fair one sits with breast unveiled, 
or if her wandering locks stray o'er a snowy brow, 
clasped at the crown with an Indian gem. And 
if perchance by her look she said me nay in 
aught, cold streams of sweat streamed from all my 
brow. 

13 Dost thou ask, Demophoon, why my heart is so 
tender to one and all ? Love knows not the
meaning of thy question "Why?" Why do some gash 
their arms with sacred knives, and cut their limbs 
to the sound of the Phrygian pipe ? To each at 
birth nature allotted a vice ; to me fortune allotted 
the doom that I should ever be in love. Though 
the fate of Thamyras the singer come upon me, 
never, my grudging friend, will I be blind to 
beauty, 

21 But if to thee my limbs seem shrunk and thin, 
thou errest; it has ne'er been a hardship to me to 
serve Venus. 'Tis a lawful question ; often a girl has 
found my passion could outlast the hours of night. 
Jove for Alcmena's sake made the stars of the Bear 
to slumber two nights long, and heaven twice was 
kingless through the dark ; yet he was not therefore 
faint when he returned to the thunderbolt. Never 
doth love exhaust its own strength. What befell 
when Achilles came from Briseis' embrace ? Did the 
Phrygians fly the less from the Thessalian's shafts ? 
When fierce Hector rose from Andromache's bed, 
did not Mycenae's fleet tremble at the battle? 
Either hero could overthrow or ships or walls; I 
will be Achilles, or fierce Hector in the strife of 
love. 

86 See how 'tis now the moon and now the sun that 
serve the sky ! Even so for me one love will not 
suffice. If one receive me not, let another hold me 
and cherish me in passionate embrace ; or if she be 
angered with my service of her, let her know that 
there is another who will gladly be mine. For a 
ship is safer when two cables hold it, and an anxious 
mother, if she rear twins, has less to dread. 


XXIIa 

Say " No ! " if thou art unkind ; or, if kind thou 
art, then come ! But why take delight in waste of 
random words? This grief alone of all doth rack 
the lover's heart, if his mistress fails his hopes and 
comes not to the tryst. What sighs shake his frame 
as he tosses o'er all his couch, when the thought that 
now some unknown lover is admitted torments him 
even to death ! Again and again he wearies his slave 
by asking, what he has heard already, and bidding 
him seek news of the fate he dreads to learn. 


XXI II 

I that once thought fit to shun this path trod by 
the vulgar herd, now find pleasure even in a draught 
from the common tank. Will any free-born man give 
money to another's slave to bring him the promised 
message of his mistress, and ask forever, "What 
shady colonnade now shields her from the sun ? " 
or "Whither wend her footsteps on the Campus 
Martius?" 

7 And then, when thou hast endured all the
Herculean labours whereof fame tells, to receive a letter 
saying, " Hast thou any present for me ? " or to win 
the privilege of facing a scowling guardian, or oft lie 
hid a prisoner in some foul hovel, how costly is the 
night of joy that comes but once in the whole 
year ! Perish the lovers that prefer the secrecy of 
closed doors ! 

13 On the other hand, she that walks at large, her 
cloak cast back from her head, and gladdens the eye, 
hedged in by no threatening guardian, she who treads 
the Sacred Way in loose shoes besmirched with mire, 
and suffers no delay if any accost her, she will never 
put thee off, nor ask in chattering voice for that 
which thy niggard father will complain he has given 
so oft. She will not say : " I am afraid : haste thee, 
rise, I pray thee : unhappy man, 'tis to-day my husband 
returns from the country." Let the girls, that
Euphrates and Orontes have sent for my delight, be all 
my joy: I hate those shamefaced thefts of love. 
Since no lover hath any freedom left him, no man 
that would be free will seek to love. 


XXIV 

ss Dost thou talk thus, when thy book has become 
famous and made thee the talk of all the town, and 
thy Cynthia is read in all the forum ? " Whose brow, 
that heard such words as these, would not be bathed 
in sweat, whether for honest modesty or for the 
shameful secret of his love ? And yet if Cynthia 
smiled on me, as once she smiled, I should not now 
be called the crown of wantonness ; my name would 
not now be draggled in dishonour through all the 
town, and though my heart still burned with no 
seemly fire, still would I cheat the world. 

9 Wherefore wonder not that now I seek common 
women; they are more sparing in slander. Seems 
that a trifling reason in your eyes ? . . . [And they 
are so expensive. Cynthia now asks me for some costly 
jewel] now demands a fan made from some proud 
peacock's tail, and would cool her hands by holding 
a hard ball of crystal ; she angers me by bidding me 
demand ivory dice for her, and such worthless gifts 
as glitter in the Sacred Way. And yet, confound 
me if I grudge the expense ! But now I am ashamed 
to be the laughing-stock of my faithless mistress ! 


XXIVa 

Cynthia, was this the hope thou didst bid me 
cherish when our love began ? Art not thou 
ashamed, being so fair, to be so fickle? Not yet 
have we spent one or two nights in love, and 
already thou tellest me I am irksome to thy couch. 
But now thou didst praise me and didst read my 
songs ; does thy love so soon turn his wings to fly 
elsewhere ? 

23 Let thy lover strive against me in wit and poetic 
skill, and first of all things let him learn to confine 
his love to one house only; if it be thy pleasure, 
let him fight with Lernaean hydras, and fetch thee 
apples from the guardianship of the Hesperian 
dragon; let him drink gladly of foul poisons, or, 
shipwrecked, the sea wave, and never refuse to be 
wretched for thy sake (ah that thou wouldst prove 
me, my beloved, with such tasks as these !), and soon 
thou shalt find him a trembling coward that is now 
so forward, that by boasts of prowess has attained 
his proud place of honour in thy heart ; next year 
shall see you parted. But a Sibyl's whole lifetime 
shall never alter my love, no, nor Alcides' toil, nor 
the dark hour of death. Thou shalt compose my 
ashes, and shalt say : " These are thy bones,
Propertius ; ah ! but thou wast true to me ! Ah ! thou 
wast true, though sprung from no noble ancestry nor 
so rich as that other." I will suffer all things for 
thee ; thy wrongs ne'er change my love ; to endure 
one so fair is to me no burden. 

41 Many, I trow, have been smitten by thy fair 
form ; but many, I trow, have broken troth with thee. 
It was but for a brief space that Theseus loved the 
daughter of Minos, that Demophoon adored Phyllis, 
a faithless pair of guests. Thou knowest well Medea 
borne on Jason's bark, and then left forlorn by the 
husband she but lately saved. 

47 Cruel is she that feigns false love for many, and 
has the heart to deck herself for many eyes.
Compare me not with the noble and wealthy : scarce one 
of them shall come to gather up thine ashes at the 
end of all. I shall perform that duty for them ; but 
rather I pray that thou mayest bewail me with bared 
bosom and thine hair unbound. 


XXV 

thou beyond all women born to be, most fair, the 
burden of mine anguish, since mine ill fate debars 
me from the words " Come and come often ! ' ' my 
books shall make thy beauty known above all other ; 
only do thou, Calvus, and thou, Catullus, grant me 
that this may be. 

6 The soldier bowed with years sleeps no longer 
by the weapons he hath laid aside ; oxen grown 
old refuse to draw the plough; the crumbling ship 
rests on the empty sands, and idle on the temple 
wall hangs the warrior's ancient shield. But never 
shall old age sunder me from love of thee, though 

1 be old as Tithonus or as Nestor old. Were it 
not better to be a cruel tyrant's slave and groan 
within thy bull, savage Perillus ? Better were it to 
turn to stone before the Gorgon's gaze or to endure 
the vultures of Caucasus. Yet will I persist. The 
blade of steel is eaten by rust, and drops of water 
oft wear down the flint. But the threshold of no 
mistress can wear down that love that abides firm 
and endures to listen to threats it has never deserved. 
Nay, the lover even answers disdain with supplications,
and wrong with the confession that 'twas himself
that sinned, and oft returns he with reluctant 
feet. 

21 Thou too, credulous lover, that waxest proud 
because thy love is at the full, know that no woman 
has solid worth for long. Does any man perform 
his vows in mid-tempest, when many a ship swims 
shattered even in port ? Or does any man demand 
the prize ere first for the seventh time the wheel hath 
grazed the goal ? Deceitful is the play of the prospering
gales of love ; the passion that comes late in time 
brings with it mighty ruin. Yet do thou meanwhile, 
though she love thee, keep thy joys close within thy 
silent breast. For in love 'tis ever his own words 
that, how I know not, do the lover greatest hurt. 
Though oft she summon thee, have a care to go 
but once : that which is envied endures but for a 
little while. 

36 But should the times return that pleased the 
maids of old, I should be what thou now art ; 'tis this 
vile age has conquered me. Yet these ill times shall 
never alter my heart : let each man have the wit to 
go his own way. 

89 But ye that bid a man serve many loves, if thus 
ye live, what agony torments your eyes ! Ye see a 
tender maid of whitest hue, or again another of darker 
brilliance : either hue attracts the eye. Ye see a girl 
whose form betrays the Greek, or, again, our Roman 
beauties; either beauty allures. Though she be 
clothed in plebeian garb or in robes of scarlet, 'tis 
by one and the same path that either cruel wound 
is dealt. Since one love can keep thine eyes from 
sleep long time enough, one woman were a host of 
ills for any man. 


XXVI 

In my dreams I saw thee, light of my life,
shipwrecked strike out with weary hands through the 
Ionian waves. I saw thee confess all thy falsehood 
toward me and sink, unable to lift thine hair weighed 
down with brine, like Helle tossed upon the purple 
waves, whom once the sheep of gold bore on its sort 
back. How I feared, lest perchance that sea should 
take thy name, and the mariner might weep for thee 
as he sailed thy waves ! What vows to Neptune did 
I then make, what vows to Castor and his brother 
and thee, Leucothoe, once mortal, now a goddess! 
But thou, scarce raising thy finger-tips over the
surface of the deep, didst oft, as one that soon must 
perish, call upon my name. 

18 But if perchance Glaucus had espied thine eyes, 
thou hadst become a maid of the Ionian sea, and the 
Nereids would have chidden thee for envy, white 
Nesaee and azure Cymothoe. But I saw a dolphin 
hasten to thine aid, the same methinks that once 
bore Arion's lyre. I was even then striving to cast 
myself from the rocky height when terror dispelled 
the vision. 


XXVIa 

Now let men wonder that so fair a maid is my slave, 
and that all the city tells of my power ! Though a 
Cambyses should return and the rivers of Croesus, 
never would she say, « Rise, poet, from my bed." For 
when she repeats my verse, she says that she hates 
wealthy suitors ; no other maid does such reverent 
honour unto song. Fidelity in love is of much avail, 
of much avail is constancy ; he that can make many 
a gift can have full many a love. 

29 Does my love think of sailing long leagues of 
sea, I will follow her. One breeze shall waft us on, 
a faithful pair, one shore shall give us rest when 
we sink in slumber, one tree overshadow us, and oft 
shall we drink from the selfsame spring. One plank 
shall yield a couch to lovers twain, whether my bed 
be strewn by prow or stern. I will endure all things, 
though the wild East Wind drive our bark and the 
South's chill blast sweep our sails, whither we know 
not ; though all ye winds should blow that once
tormented the hapless Ulysses and wrecked the thousand 
ships of Greece on Euboea's shore, and ye also that 
parted the two shores, when the dove was sent to 
Argus to guide his bark over an unknown sea. If 
only she be never absent from my sight, let Jove 
himself fire our ship ! For surely our naked corpses 
will be cast together upon the same shore ; let the 
wave sweep me away, if only thou find burial in 
earth. 

46 But Neptune frowns not on love strong as ours ; 
Neptune was Jove his brother's equal in the field of 
love. Witness Amymone, that in the meadows yielded 
to his embrace, that so she might find the fountain ; 
witness Lerna's marsh smitten by the trident. Then 
did the god redeem his promise at the price of his 
embrace, and straightway for her an urn of gold 
poured forth a stream divine. Orithyia also denied 
that Boreas, the ravisher, was cruel ; this god tames 
both earth and the deeps of ocean. Believe me, Scylla 
will grow kind for us, and wild Charybdis also, that 
ceases never from her ebb and flow. Nor shall any 
darkness obscure the stars. Clear shall Orion be, 
and clear the Kid. Nay, what if I should breathe 
my last upon thy body ! No dishonour will be mine 
in such an end as this. 


XXVII 

Yet do ye mortals inquire after the uncertain hour 
of death, and of the path by which your doom shall 
draw anigh, and in the unclouded heaven ye seek 
by the art the Phoenicians found of old what star is 
good, what star is ill for man. Whether on foot we 
follow the flying Parthian or with our fleet attack 
the Briton, blind are the perils both by land and sea. 
And again thou weepest that thy life is threatened 
by the storm of war, when Mars on this side and on 
that mingles the wavering ranks ; thou dreadest also 
fire for thy house and ruin, and tremblest lest thou
put cups of dark poison to thy lips. The lover only 
knows when and by what death he shall perish, and 
fears nor weapons nor blasts of the North Wind. Yea, 
even though he sit at the oar among the reeds of 
Styx and gaze on the dismal sails of the boat of hell, 
if the faint whisper of his mistress' voice cry out and 
call him back from the dead, he will return over that 
road that the eternal ordinance hath sealed. 


XXVIII 

Jupiter, at length have pity on my mistress, stricken 
sore ; the death of one so fair will be accounted to 
thee for a crime. For the season has come when 
the scorching air seethes with heat and earth begins 
to glow beneath the parching Dog-star. But 'tis not 
so much the fault of the heat, nor hath heaven so 
much the blame for her illness, as that so oft she 
hath spurned the sanctity of the gods. This is it that 
undoes hapless girls, aye, and hath undone many ; 
wind and water sweep away their every oath. 

9 Was Venus vexed that thou wast compared with 
her ? She is a jealous goddess to all alike, that vie 
with her in loveliness. Or didst thou spurn the temple 
of Pelasgian Juno, or deny that Pallas' eyes were 
fair ? Ye beauties, never have ye learned to spare 
your words ; Cynthia, thou owest this to thine offending
tongue and to thy beauty. But anguished as thou 
hast been through many a deadly peril, at last hath 
come an hour of greater ease. So Io wore a strange 
guise and lowed all her earlier years ; but now she 
is a goddess, that once drank Nilus' waters in
likeness of a cow. Ino also wandered o'er the earth in 
her prime ; but now she is called Leucothoe, and 'tis 
on her the hapless sailor calls for aid. Andromeda 
was doomed to the monsters of the deep, yet even 
she became the far-famed wife of Perseus. Callisto 
wandered as a bear over the fields of Arcadia ; now 
with her own star's light she guides the sails of 
mariners through the dark. 

25 Yet if it chance that the Fates hasten down 
on thee the eternal rest, the Fates of funeral made 
blest for thee, thou shalt tell Semele what dangers 
beauty brings ; and she, taught by her own misfortune,
will believe thee : and among all the Maeonian 
heroines thou by consent of all shalt have the
foremost place. Now as best thou may, bear thyself 
reverently towards destiny on thy couch of pain; 
heaven and the cruel hour of death alike may change. 
Even Juno, the jealous wife, will forgive thee for 
thy beauty; even Juno is touched with pity for a 
maiden's death. 

36 Now cease the wheels whirled to the magic 
chant, the altar fire is dead and the laurel lies in ashes. 
Now the moon refuses to descend so oft from heaven, 
and the bird of night sings ominous of death. One 
murky boat of destiny shall bear our loves together, 
setting sail to the pools of Hell. But pity not one 
only, I pray thee, Jupiter ; pity the twain of us. If 
she lives, I will live ; if she dies, I too will die.
Wherefore if my prayer be granted I bind myself with this 
solemn verse, to write : the might of jove hath 
saved my mistress; and she herself after she hath 
sacrificed to thee will sit before thy feet, and seated 
there will tell of the long perils she has passed. 


XXVIIIa 

Persephone, may thy mercy endure, nor mayest thou, 
that hast Persephone for spouse, be over-cruel. There 
are so many thousand beauties among the dead ; let 
one fair one, if so it may be, abide on earth. With 
you is Iope, with you snowy Tyro, with you Europe 
and impious Pasiphae, and all the beauties that 
Troy and Achaea bore of old, Troy the fallen realm 
of Phoebus and the old man Priam. And all the 
fair, that Rome may rank with these, have perished : 
all these the greedy pyre hath taken for its own. 
Neither beauty nor fortune abideth everlastingly for 
any ; sooner or later death awaiteth all. 

69 Since then, light of mine eyes, thou hast escaped 
from mighty peril, render Diana the dance thou owest 
for offering ; and as is due, keep vigil in honour of 
her who, once a heifer, is now a goddess, and on my 
behalf pay her ten nights of worship. 


XXIX 

Yesternight, light of mine eyes, when I wandered 
heavy with wine and with never a servant's hand to 
lead me home, a crowd of tiny boys met me ; how 
many I know not, for fear forbade me count them. 
Some carried little torches and others arrows, while 
some seemed even to make ready fetters for me. Yet 
naked were they all. Then one that was more wanton 
than the rest cried : " Seize him, for ye know him well 
of old. This is he that the angry woman delivered 
to us." He spake, and straightway a noose was about 
my head. Another then bade them thrust me into 
their midst, while a third cried : " Perish the man that 
deems us not divine ! Whole hours hath she waited 
thee, though little thou deservest it, while thou, fool, 
didst seek another's door. When she has loosened 
the strings of her nightcap of Sidonian purple and 
turns on thee her slumber-laden eyes, then will sweet 
odours breathe upon thee such as the herbs of Araby 
ne'er gave, but Love himself made with his own hands. 
Spare him now, brothers ; now he pledges that his love 
shall be true : and lo ! we have come to the house 
whither we were bidden." Thus did they lead me 
back to my mistress' house. " Go now," they cried, 
" and learn to stay at home of nights." 


XXIXa 

'Twas morn and I wished to see if alone she took 
her rest, and behold Cynthia was in her bed alone. 
I stood amazed ; for never seemed she to mine eyes 
more fair, not even when, clad in purple tunic, she 
went to lay her dreams before chaste Vesta, for fear 
some ill might threaten herself and me. So seemed 
she to me, as she woke from her fresh slumber. 
Ah, how great is the power of beauty unadorned ! 
" What ! " quoth she, " thou that spiest thus early on 
thy mistress, deemst thou that my ways are like to 
thine ? I am not so fickle : 'tis enough for me to 
know one lover such as thee, or one perchance of 
truer love than thine. There are no signs of impress 
on the couch, the marks of lovers taking their delight, 
no signs that two have lain therein. See ! from my 
bosom springs no deep-drawn breath, that, as thou 
knowest, might tell thee that I had been untrue." 
She spake, and with her right hand resisted and 
thrust away my kisses, and leapt forth from the bed, 
loose slippers on her feet. So was I rebuffed, that 
sought to watch o'er her, that kept her love so pure ; 
since then no happy night has e'er been mine. 


XXX 

Hard-hearted, dost thou now make ready to cross the 
Phrygian waves, and on shipboard seek the shores 
of the Hyrcanian sea? [to sprinkle our common 
household gods with mutual slaughter and bring 
dread prizes to the home of thy fathers ?] 

1 Whither fliest thou, mad heart? There is no 
escape. Fly as far as Tanais ; Love will hunt 
thee down. Thou shalt not escape, though thou be 
borne aloft on the back of Pegasus, nor though the 
pinions of Perseus wing thy feet. Or should the 
cloven breezes sweep thee along on feathered 
sandals, yet will the lofty path of Mercury avail 
thee naught. Love swoops ever above thy head; 
Love swoops down upon the lover, and sits a heavy 
burden on the neck that once was free. He is a 
watcher that slumbers not nor sleeps, nor ever will 
he suffer thee to raise thine eyes from off the 
ground when once he has enslaved them; and yet 
shouldst thou go astray, he is a god whom prayers 
may appease, if he but see that they are prompt to 
rise. Let stern old men denounce those revels of 
love ; only let us, my life, pursue our chosen path. 
Their ears are burdened with the precepts of
antiquity ; but this is the place where thou, skilled pipe, 
shouldst sound, thou that of old didst float along 
Maeander's shallows, where unjustly thou wast cast 
when thou didst swell the cheeks of Pallas and mar 
the fairness of her face. 

23 Shall I feel shame to live content in the service 
of one mistress ? If this be a crime, to Love's door 
shall the crime be laid ; let no one charge me there- 
with ! And, Cynthia, be it thy joy to dwell with me in 
dewy grottoes on the mossy hills. There shalt thou 
see the Sisters clinging to the crags, while they chant 
the sweet loves of Jove in olden time, how he was 
consumed with fire for Semele, how madly he loved 
Io, and then how in likeness of a bird he flew to the 
abodes of Troy. (But if none hath e'er had strength 
to o'ercome the might of the winged one, why am 
I alone accused of the crime that all must share ?) 
Nor shalt thou, Cynthia, grieve the demure faces of 
the Holy Maids ; even their choir knows what it is to 
love, if it be true that for all their chastity a certain 
Muse lay upon the rocks of Bistonia locked in the arms 
of one that seemed Oeagrus. And there, when they 
shall place thee in the foremost rank of their dance, 
and Bacchus stands in the midst with his wand of skill, 
then will I suffer the holy ivy berries to hang about 
my head ; for without thee my wit availeth naught. 


XXXI 

Thou askest why I am late in coming to thee. 
To-day was the golden colonnade of Phoebus opened 
by mighty Caesar; so vast it was tq view, laid out 
with Punic columns, between which stood the many 
daughters of the old man Danaus. Next in the midst 
of all the temple rose built of shining marble and 
dearer to Phoebus than his Ortygian home. And on 
the topmost roof were two chariots of the Sun, and 
the doors were of Libyan ivory wrought in wondrous 
wise. One told the fearful tale of the Gauls hurled 
down from off Parnassus' peak, and one the death of 
the daughter of Tantalus. And last between his 
mother and his sister stood the Pythian god himself,
clad in long raiment, his voice uplifted in song. 
Fairer he seemed to me than Phoebus' self, as he 
sang with silent lyre and parted lips of stone. And 
round about the altar stood Myron's kine, four 
counterfeit oxen, statues that seemed to live. 



XXXII 

Who sees thee sins : he then that hath not seen 
thee will not desire thee : 'tis the eyes must bear 
the blame. Else why at Praeneste seekst thou 
oracles of double import ? Why seekst thou the 
walls of Aeaean Telegonus ? Why does thy chariot 
bear thee so oft to Herculean Tibur ? Why so oft 
does the Appian Way lead thee to Lanuvium ? 

7 Ah that thou wouldst walk here in all thine 
hours of leisure! but the world forbids me trust 
thee, when it beholds thee hurry in frenzy with 
kindled torches to the Arician grove, and bear lights 
in honour of the goddess Trivia. Forsooth, thou 
carest naught for Pompey's colonnade, with its shady 
columns, bright-hung with gold-embroidered
curtains ; naught for the avenue thick-planted with 
plane-trees rising in trim rows ; nor the waters that 
flow from Maro's slumbering form and run, their 
Naiads babbling through all the streets of Rome, till 
at the last, with sudden plunge, they vanish in the 
Triton's mouth.

17 Thou deceiv'st thyself ; thy wanderings reveal 
some secret passion ; 'tis not the city, 'tis my eyes 
thou flyest. Thou strivest in vain; empty are the 
wiles thou spinnest against me ; with little skill thou 
spreadst familiar snares for me, whom experience has 
taught. But for myself it matters little; the loss 
of thine honest name will be no less great than it 
deserves to be. For of late rumour spake ill of thee 
in mine ears, and a tale of evil ran through all the 
city. 

26 And yet thou shouldst not trust these bitter 
words ; scandal has ever been the doom of beauty. 
Thine honour has ne'er been blasted by the crime of 
poisoning ; thou, Phoebus, wilt bear witness that her 
hands are unsullied. And if thou hast spent one 
night or two in long-drawn wantoning, such petty 
crimes vex me not a whit. The daughter of
Tyndareus left her fatherland for the love of a stranger, 
and yet was brought home alive without condemnation.
Venus herself is said to have been seduced 
by the lust of Mars, yet none the less had she honour 
alway in heaven. Though Ida's mount tell how a 
goddess loved the shepherd Paris, and lay with 
him among his flocks, yet all this the band of sister 
Hamadryads beheld, and the old Sileni and the 
father of their company himself; and with them 
thou, Naiad, didst gather in the glens of Ida wild 
apples falling to thy hand upstretched beneath the 
boughs. 

41 After a host of sinners such as these does any 
ask : " Why is she so rich ? " " Who gave ? Whence 
came his gifts ? " O Rome in these our days, thy 
happiness is full to overflowing, if one girl act not as 
her fellows do. All these things did Lesbia before 
Cynthia, wherefore Lesbia's follower is of a surety 
less hateful. He that hopes still to find the ancient 
Tatii, and the strict Sabine, has but lately set foot in 
our city. Sooner shalt thou have power to dry the 
waters of the deep and pluck down the lofty stars 
with mortal hand, than bring it to pass that our maids 
should refuse to sin. Such was the fashion in the 
reign of Saturn, and when Deucalion's waves overflowed
the world ; but after Deucalion's flood in the 
days of old, tell me, who was ever able to keep his 
bed chaste, what goddess could ever bide alone with 
one god only ? The wife of great Minos, once, 'tis 
said, was seduced by the snowy form of a fierce bull, 
nor was Danae girt in her tower of bronze less unable 
to keep her chastity and deny mighty Jove. But if 
thou hast taken the women of Greece and of Rome 
for patterns, live ever in freedom ; I blame thee 
not. 


XXXIII 

Once more those dismal rites have returned to 
plague ust now for ten nights hath Cynthia
sacrificed. And a curse upon the rites which the 
daughter of Inachus hath sent from the warm Nile 
to the matrons of Italy ! The goddess that so oft 
hath sundered such ardent lovers, whoe'er she may 
have been, was always a bitter goddess. Yet, Io, 
in truth thou didst learn in thy secret loves with 
Jove what it is to tread many paths of wandering, 
when Juno bade thee wear horns upon thy girlish 
brow and lose thy speech in the harsh bellowings of 
kine. Ah ! how oft didst thou gall thy mouth with 
oak-leaves, and in thy stall didst chew once more the 
arbutus, on which thou hadst fed ! Hast thou become 
so haughty a goddess since Jupiter took away from 
thee thy wild shape? Hast thou not worshippers 
enough among the swart Egyptians? Why didst 
thou come such a long journey to Rome? What 
profits it thee that maids should sleep alone ? Nay, 
believe me, thy horns will sprout again, or we will 
chase thee, cruel goddess, from our city ! There 
ne'er was love lost 'twixt Tiber and Nile. 

21 But thou, Cynthia, since my woes have more than 
appeased thee, let us, whom these nights kept idle, 
thrice make love's journey together. 

23 Thou hearest me not and lettest my words
become a mockery, though Icarus' oxen are wheeling 
their slow-moving stars to the setting ; thou drinkst 
unmoved ; has midnight no power to weary thee ? 
or is thy hand never tired of casting the dice ? A 
curse on him that first introduced the pure juice 
of the grape and first spoilt wholesome water by 
mixing wine therein ! 

29 Icarus, justly wast thou slain by the farmers of 
Cecrops' land ; thou hast found how rueful is the 
scent of the vine. Thou also, centaur Eurytion, didst 
perish through wine-bibbing, and thou, Polyphemus, 
wast undone by the Ismarian grape. Wine marreth 
beauty, wine spoils our prime ; and thanks to wine 
a mistress oft knows not her lover. 

35 Woe is me : deep draughts have changed thee 
not a whit: drink on; thou art beautiful, the wine 
does thee no hurt, when garlands hang over thy brow 
and droop into thy cups, and thou read est my verses 
with utterance soft and low. Let the board be 
drowned still deeper in floods of Falernian and 
more lusciously foam the wine in thy cup of gold! 
Yet no woman ever betakes her willingly to a lonely 
bed ; there is a somewhat that Love compels all to 
seek. Woman's heart is kinder always towards absent 
lovers ; long possession takes from the worth of the 
persistent wooer. 


XXXIV 

Why should any one henceforth entrust his mistress' 
beauty to the care of Love ? Thus was my beloved 
nearly stolen from me. I speak from experience; 
no man is ever faithful in love, and rarely does any, 
beholding beauty, seek not to make it his own. 
Love pollutes kinship, parts friends, and summons 
them, that are well agreed, to bitter strife. The 
adulterer, that was made welcome by Menelaus, was 
a stranger ; and did not the woman of Colchis follow 
a lover whom she knew not ? 

9 Lynceus, hadst thou the heart to touch my 
beloved? Did not thy hands, faithless friend, fall 
powerless then ? What if she had not been so 
constant and so true? Couldst thou have lived in 
such guilt ? Take my life with poison or the sword, 
only take thyself away from my mistress. Thou 
mayest be the comrade of my life and part never 
from my side ; my friend, I make thee lord of all my 
fortune ; 'tis only as partner in my love that I would 
have thee never : I cannot endure a rival, though 
he were Jove himself. I am jealous of mine own 
shadow, a thing of naught, fool that I am to tremble 
with causeless fear. One plea alone can make me 
pardon such a crime: deep draughts of wine had 
caused thy tongue to stray. Yet never shall thy 
brow, wrinkled with stern morality, deceive me : the 
world is old enough for all to know how good a thing 
is love. 

25 Late though it be, at last Lynceus, my friend, is 
mad with love ! Of this only am I glad, that at last 
thou worshippest the gods we lovers serve. What 
will avail thee now thy wisdom drawn from Socratic 
books, what the power to set forth the cause of things ? 
What avails thee the songs of the Athenian lyre ? 
Thine ancient bard availeth naught against o'er- 
mastering love. Do thou rather imitate in thy song 
Coan Philetas, and the dreams of restrained
Callimachus. Now, though thou shouldst tell once more 
how the stream of Aetolian Achelous flowed shattered 
by the might of love, and withal how the deceitful 
wave of Maeander wanders in the Phrygian plain 
and perplexes its own channels, and how, mourning 
at the funeral of Archemorus, Adrastus' victorious 
steed Arion spake aloud, naught will avail thee the 
fate of the chariot of Amphiaraus, nor the overthrow 
of Capaneus that made glad the heart of Jove. Cease 
to frame verse shod with the buskin of Aeschylus, 
and bend thy limbs in the soft choric dance. Begin 
now to turn thy verses on a narrower lathe, and sing 
of thine own flames, hard-hearted poet. Thou shalt 
not be safer in thy goings than Antimachus or 
Homer : for a comely girl despises even the power 
of the gods. 

47 Yet the stubborn bull yields not to the yoke of 
the plough, e'er his horns have been caught in the 
stout noose. Nor wilt thou of thyself be able to 
endure the hardships of love ; first thou must have 
thy fierce spirit tamed by me. Never will girl inquire 
concerning the system of the universe, nor ask why 
the labours of the moon depend on her brother's 
steeds, nor if in truth there is a judge beyond the 
waves of Styx, nor if the crashing thunderbolts be 
hurled by an aiming hand. Look on me, to whom 
but a scanty fortune hath been left at home, whose 
ancestors ne'er triumphed for battles long ago, see 
how I reign at the banquet in the midst of a crowd 
of girls, thanks to the wit for which thou now makest 
light of me ! 

69 Be it mine to lie languidly among the wreaths 
of yesterday, for the god hath stricken me with aim 
unerring even to the bone. Be it for Vergil to sing 
the shores of Actium o'er which Phoebus watches, 
and Caesar's gallant ships of war; Vergil that now 
wakes to life the arms of Trojan Aeneas and the 
walls he founded on the Lavinian shore. Yield ye, 
bards of Rome, yield ye, singers of Greece !
Something greater than the Iliad now springs to birth ! 
Vergil, thou singest beneath the pine- woods of shady 
Galaesus of Thyrsis, and Daphnis with the well-worn 
pipe of reed, and how ten apples or a kid fresh from 
the udder of its dam may win the love of a girl. 
Happy thou that thus cheaply buyest thy love with 
apples ; to such a love may evenTityrus sing, unkind 
though she be. Happy, too, Cory don, who seeks to win 
Alexis, the darling of the farmer, his master, Alexis 
yet unwon ; even though he weary and rest from his 
piping, yet is he praised by the wanton Hamadryads. 
Thou singest also the precepts of Ascra's poet old, 
telling in what plains the corn grows green, and on 
what hills the vine. Such music makest thou as the 
Cynthian god modulates with fingers pressed upon 
his well-skilled lyre. Yet these songs of thine will 
fail to please none that reads, whether he be skilled 
in love or all unlearned ; and the melodious " swan/' 
less lofty of accent, yet no less inspired when he 
sings the songs of love, sinks not to tuneless cackle 
like the " goose."

85 Such sportive themes also did Varro sing when 
his tale of Jason was all told; Varro, Leucadia's 
mightiest flame. Such are the songs that wanton 
Catullus wrote, whose Lesbia is better known than 
Helen. Such passion also the pages of learned 
Calvus did confess, when he sang of the death of 
hapless Quintilia ; and dead Gallus too, that of late 
laved in the streams of Hell the many wounds dealt 
him by fair Lycoris. Nay, Cynthia also has been 
glorified by Propertius — if Fame shall grant me a 
place mid such as they. 
