ELEGIES OF LYGDAMUS 

I 

The festal Calends of Mars of Rome are come. This 
for our ancestors was the year's dawning. And on 
all sides, travelling in order due, presents are speeding 
this way and that along the city's streets and houses. 
Tell me, Pierian maids, with what tribute shall I 
present Neaera, whether mine or, if she plays me 
false, dear to me still. 

7 " Poetry is the lure for the beautiful, gold for the 
greedy : so let there be new verses to gladden her 
as she deserves. But first let yellow parchment wrap 
the snow-white roll and pumice shear its hoary locks, 
and letters traced to show thy name border the 
high top of the fine papyrus, and let the horned 
knobs 'mid both its fronts be painted. For in such 
trim guise must thy work be sent." 

15 Inspirers of this my song, I entreat ye by the 
shade of Castaly and the Pierian springs go to the 
house, and give her the dainty book just as it is ; let 
none of its bloom be lost. She will send me answer 
if her love is still as mine, or if it is less, or if I 
have fallen wholly out of her heart. And first (she 
has deserved it) bestow on her an ample greeting 
and in subdued accents speak these words : 

23 "Thy husband once, thy brother now, sends 
these lines to thee, chaste Neaera, and prays thee to 
accept the humble gift. He swears that thou art 
dearer to him than his very marrow, whether thou 
wilt be his sister or his wife. Better his wife : hope 
of this title shall only Dis's wan waters take from him 
when his life is quenched." 


II 

He who first robbed a swain of his dear and a girl of 
the youth she loved was a man of iron. And he was 
hard too who could bear a grief so great and live 
when his mate was taken. I am not stout in this \ 
in my strain is no such endurance. Pain makes the 
brave heart break. I think it no shame to speak 
the truth or to own that within me there is risen 
loathing of a life that has suffered so much 
sorrow. 

9 So then when I am changed to a phantom shade 
and above my white bones lies the black ashes'
covering, let Neaera come to my pyre with her long hair 
disordered and sadly weep beside it. Let her come 
with her dear mother to share her grief, to mourn, 
one for a husband, the other for a son. 

16 First of all let them address my shade and fresh 
departed spirit and in lustral water bathe their hands. 
Then with black robes ungirdled shall they gather 
the white bones, sole part remaining of my body, 
and when they are gathered together sprinkle them 
with old wine first and next proceed to drench them 
with snowy milk likewise, and after this to remove 
the moisture with linen cloths and place them dry in 
a chamber of marble. There let the merchandise 
which rich Panchaia, Eastern Araby, and rich Assyria 
send, and tears to my memory withal, be shed on the  
same spot. Thus, when naught is left of me but bones, 
would I be laid to rest. 

27 But the sad cause of my death let a legend show, 
and on the stone's face which all may see let it set 
out these lines : 

HERE LYGDAMUS IS LAID, BY GRIEVOUS PAIN 
AND LONGING FOR HIS LOST NEAERA SLAIN. 


III

What gain is it to have filled the heavens with vows, 
Neaera, and offered bland incense with constant 
prayer, not that I might step out from the threshold 
of a marble dwelling, observed and noted for a 
glorious house, or that bulls of mine might turn the 
clods o'er many a rood and earth in her bounty give 
me great harvests, but that through long years of 
life I might share my joys with thee, and that in 
thine arms might drop my aged frame in the hour 
when my course of light was fully run and stripped 
of all I was forced to voyage on the barque of Lethe ? 

11 What good to me were heavy weight of precious 
gold or a thousand oxen cleaving my rich fields ? 
what good a house that rests on pillars from Phrygian 
quarries, or, Taenaros, from thine, or thine, Carystos, 
woods within mansions mimicking the sacred groves, 
or gilded cross-beams and a floor of marble ? Or what 
the pearl shell gathered on Erythraean shores, or wool 
dipped in the purple dye of Sidon, and all besides that 
the world admires ? Here env) 7 lodges : the crowd is 
misguided in most that it adores. Wealth lightens 
not the hearts and cares of men. For Fortune rules 
their circumstances by ordinances of her own. 

23 With thee, Neaera, would I welcome poverty 
without thee I want nothing that the kings can give, 
O snow-bright morn that shall give thee back to me 
O day that will bring me three- and four-fold bliss ! 

27 But if the unfriendly god should turn his ears 
away from all that I vow for that dear return, 
then no kingdoms please me, nor river of Lydia 
charged with gold, nor all the wealth that the earth's 
round bears. Let others long for these; but let me 
live in humble style, if without misgivings I may 
have my dear wife for my own. 

33 Be with me, daughter of Saturn, and listen to 
my timid prayers, and thou too listen, goddess of 
Cyprus whose chariot is thy shell. But if Fate and 
the dour sisters who draw the yarn and spin the 
future deny returning, then let the voice of sallow 
Orcus, the lord of treasures amidst sluggish waters, 
call me to his desolate rivers and his black morass. 


IV 

May the gods send better fortune, nor may the 
dream prove true which an evil sleep brought me 
yesternight. Depart from me, vain visions, take your 
false show away ; cease to seek credit at my cost. 
The warnings gods send are true, and true the
warnings of the inward parts, approved by seers of
Tuscany, announcing the fate to come. But dreams — 
do they sport at random in a deceiving night, filling 
affrighted souls with false alarms, and, vainly fearing, 
do mankind seek to propitiate the menaces of the 
night with offering of spelt and sputtering salt ? And 
yet, howsoever it be, whether they are wont to
receive true warnings or to give ear to lies of sleep, 
may Lucina frustrate the terrors of this night and 
ordain that the innocevt shall have been alarmed in 
vain, if neither my soul be chargeable with ugly 
sin nor my tongue have wickedly profaned the holy 
gods. 

17 Night's car of four black steeds had already 
traversed the firmament of ether and bathed its 
wheels in the dark blue stream. Yet on me the god 
who aids the sick spirit had laid no spell : Sleep 
vanishes before the house of care. At last, when 
Phoebus looked out above the dawn, late slumber 
closed the tired sufferer's eyes. Thereon a youth 
with holy bay encircling his brow, methought, set 
foot within my dwelling. Nothing more lovely than 
him did any age of our forerunners see, or any 
house of mortal folk. Down his long neck his
unshorn hair was streaming. From his myrrh-laden 
tresses trickled dews of Syria. His radiance was 
such as the moon, daughter of Latona, spreads before 
her, and over his body's snow was a crimson flush, 
such as dyes the fair cheeks and blushing face of a 
maid when she is first escorted to her young husband's 
home, or like white lilies which flower-girls
interweave with amaranths, or argent apples touched with 
autumn red. The hem of his palla seemed to play 
about his ankles. For this was the garment that 
covered his gleaming limbs. On his left side hung 
his babbling lyre, wrought with rare skill, shining 
with tortoise-shell and gold. On this, when first he 
came, he played with ivory quill, and cheering music 
sounded from his lips. But when fingers and voice 
had spoken together, then to the tune of a sweet 
measure he uttered these bitter words : 

43 Hail to thee, favourite of the gods — for to a 
holy poet Phoebus, Bacchus, and the Pierid maids 
are fitly friends. But Bacchus, offspring of Semele, 
and the lettered sisters have no skill to say what 
future hours shall bring. But to me my Sire has 
granted the power to see the laws of Fate and what 
shall issue in the time to come. Wherefore hearken 
to what I say, no seer untrustworthy, and learn how 
true are accounted the utterances of Cynthus' god. 
She who is as precious to thee as is no daughter to 
her mother nor maiden fair to her yearning husband, 
for whom thy prayers give the powers of heaven no 
rest, who never lets thy day pass without misgiving, 
and when Sleep has wrapped thee in his dusky robe 
baffles and mocks thee with her semblances in the 
night, the beautiful Neaera whom thy songs have 
made renowned, prefers to be the girl of another man. 
Her unnatural heart pursues an alien fancy of its own, 
and Neaera delights not to be a wife in a virtuous 
home. O cruel sex ! Woman a treacherous race ! 
Away with her who has learned to play her husband 
false ! 

63 " But she may be turned : their minds are
changeable: but thou must stretch thy hands to her with 
much beseeching. Tyrant Love has schooled us to 
engage in stubborn labours, tyrant Love to endure the 
lash. It is no story made for idle merriment that once 
I fed the snow-white kine of Admetus. Then could 
I take no pleasure in the lyre's loud tones nor my 
voice sing back in accord to its strings, but on the 
unstopped reeds I practised, I, Latona's son and 
Jove's. Young sir, thou knowest not what is love 
if thou dost shrink to bear with a cruel mistress and 
ungentle wife. So doubt not to use the gentle 
arts of complaining : soft pleadings make the hard 
heart melt. Jf oracles in holy temples utter truth, 
then give her this message in my name : This is 
the mate that the Delian himself awards to thee. 
Happy in him, cease to desire another man." 

81 He said, and from my limbs slipped off the 
lethargy of sleep. Ah, may I never live to see such 
woe! I could not think that thou hast hopes thus 
crossing hopes, or that sin so great is harboured in thy 
breast. For thou wast not sprung from the waste sea's 
fields, or from Chimaera rolling flames from savage 
jaws, or from the dog with three tongues and a triple 
head and back by a snaky troop encircled, or Scylla 
with a girdle of hounds about her woman's body. No 
cruel lioness conceived and bore thee, nor the
barbarous land of Scythia or the fearful Syrtis, but a 
humane home where the ungentle might not dwell 
and a mother far kinder than all her sex, and a sire 
than whom is none more lovable. 

95 May a god turn this cruel dream to good, 
or bid the hot South Wind carry it away without 
fulfilment ! 


V 

Ye, my friends, stay by the stream that flows from 
Etruscan source, stream not to be approached in the 
Dog-stars heat, but now second only to the holy 
waters of Baiae when the ground loosens in bright- 
hued spring. But I have warning from Persephone 
that the black hour is nigh. 

6 Harm me not, goddess; I am young and have 
done no wrong. I have not sought in recklessness 
to make known the rites of the goddess whom folk 
call Good, which no male must profane. My hand 
has infused no deadly juices in men's cups or pounded 
poison for the lips of any one. Nor have I sacrilegiously 
set fire to temples, nor is my conscience vexed by 
horrid crime, nor from the pent-up bitterness of a 
frantic soul have I let my blaspheming tongue wag 
in the very face of heaven. 

15 Neither as yet has my black hair been harmed by 
grey, nor bowed age come to me on halting feet. My 
parents first beheld my birthday when both the
consuls fell by the self-same fate. What gain is it to rob 
a vine of growing grapes or to pluck the fruit just 
formed with brutal hand ? Spare me, ye gods in whose 
sway are the wan waters and the stern realms, allotted 
to you third. Let the hour be far off when my eyes 
shall see the Elysian plains, the barque of Lethe, and 
the Cimmerian pools, when my cheeks are sallow with 
wrinkled age and the old man tells the boys of the 
days gone by. 

27 And would it were no real fever, but some vain 
alarm ! But for thrice five days their strength has 
left my limbs. 

29 But ye, my friends, resort to the haunts of 
Tuscan water sprites, and the stream parts lightly 
to the strokes of your leisurely arms. May ye live 
happy and with thoughts of me, whether I am here 
or destiny choose that I be no more. Meantime 
do ye promise black sheep to Dis and cups of snow- 
white milk mingled with wine 


VI 

Fair Liber, come to me ; so mayst thou ever have 
thy mystic vine, so bear the ivy bound about thy 
brows. And do thou take away my pain with
healing chalice. Oft has Love fallen, vanquished by thy 
bounty. Dear lad, let the cups be flooded with 
noble wine; slant the hand that pours out our 
Falernian. 

7 Go. far away go, toils and troubles, heartless tribe. 
Here let the Delian shine with his birds of snow. 
Only, dear friends, ye must approve my project, and 
none refuse his company if I lead the way. Or if 
any shrinks from wine's gentle bouts, let his dear 
lass play him false with covert treachery. Our god 
softens the heart, he crushes the proud spirits and 
sends them under the strict yoke of a mistress. He 
vanquishes the Armenian tiger and the tawny lioness 
and puts a tame heart in the tameless. These things, 
and greater, can Love do. But do ye call for the 
gifts of Bacchus. For which of you have chill 
draughts charms ? 

19 A mate and equal, with no front of menace, 
doth Liber show himself to such as pay their court 
to him and joyous wine at once ; while without 
bound or measure runs his wrath against the
austere. Whoso fears a mighty god in anger, let him 
drink. For such what chastisement he threatens, 
what and how great the threatener,the bloody quarry 
of the Theban mother shows us well. But far from 
us be this terror ; let her feel all the anger of an 
outraged god. Ah, what is this mad prayer ? May 
the winds and clouds of heaven bear off and scatter 
all ways the reckless wish ! And, Neaera, though 
no thought of me survives in thy breast, mayst 
thou be happy and thy lot be bright. But let us 
devote these moments to the cheering board. After 
many days a cloudless one has come. 

33 Ah me ! mock joys are hard to make ; 'tis hard 
to feign merriment when the heart is sad. Ill is it 
to force a false smile to the face ; ill is it when tipsy 
accents are heard from the distressed. Unhappy, 
what is this complaining ? Away, ye ugly cares 
Father Lenaeus loathes the language of sorrow. In 
old times, maid of Cnossos, thou wast left alone to 
mourn the perjuries of Theseus' tongue to an alien sea. 
So for thee, daughter of Minos, did accomplished 
Catullus sing, recounting the wicked doings of thy 
ingrate husband. And so I now warn you, friends. 
Fortunate wilt thou be who art taught by another's 
suffering to avoid thy own. Be not ye deceived by 
arms flung round your necks, or cheated by a knavish 
tongue with wheedling prayers. Though the beguiler 
swear by her eyes, by her Juno, by her Venus, there 
will be no truth in her words. Jupiter laughs at 
the false oaths of lovers, and bids the winds carry 
them off without fulfilment. Then why do I
complain so oft of the words of a faithless girl ? Away 
from me, I pray, all serious talk ! How I could wish 
to pass with thee long nights of rest and spend 
with thee long waking days, maid faithless, and for 
no fault of mine — faithless, but, though faithless, 
beloved still. 

57 Bacchus loves the Naiad. Dost thou lag, my 
slow attendant? Let Marcian water temper our 
ancient wine. If a trustless girl, in her yearning 
for a stranger's arms, has fled the entertainment 
of my table, shall I be sighing in distress the whole 
night through ? Not I. Come, boy, and without 
faltering pour in the bright wine. Long ago should 
I have drenched my brows with nard of Syria and 
twined a garland in my hair. 


EULOGY OF MESSALLA 

Messalla, I will sing of thee albeit the knowledge 
of thy worth affrights me. Though my feeble powers 
may not bear the strain, still will I make beginning: 
and, if my verse fall short of thy meed of praise and 
I am but a poor chronicler for deeds so great, and if 
none but thyself can so embroider ^ihe page with thy 
achievements that what is left is not greater than 
what is recounted, it is enough for me to have 
shown the will. And do not thou reject the humble 
offering. Even to Phoebus did the Cretan bring gifts 
most welcome, and to Bacchus was Icarus a host 
more pleasing than all besides, as stars in the clear 
sky witness, Erigone and the Hound, lest a distant 
age deny the tale. Nay, more : Alcides, who was 
to mount a god to Olympus, gladly set foot in the 
dwelling of Molorchus. A few grains [of salt]
appease the powers above ; nor do they always claim as 
their victim a bull with gilded horns. So may this 
humble effort prove welcome also, that thereafter the 
memory may give me strength to make yet other and 
yet other verses in thy honour, 

18 Let another tell of the great world's wondrous 
fabric, how the Earth sank down in the measureless 
Air and how the Sea streamed over the round globe ; 
and how, where the shifting Air strives to rise from 
the Earth, conjoined to it closely far and wide
undulates the fiery Ether, and how all is shut in above by 
the hanging Firmament. All efforts of my muses' 
daring, whether they can reach thy level or whether 
(but this Hope grants not) they rise above it or they 
fall below (and below it surely will they fall), I
dedicate to thee ; nor must a name so great be wanting 
to my page. For though thou hast distinctions
abundant in thy ancient family, thy thirst for fame is not 
to be sated with the renown of ancestors, nor dost 
thou ask what saith the scroll beneath each mask ; 
but thou strivest to surpass the olden honours of thy 
line, thyself a greater lustre to posterity than ancestry 
to thee. For thy exploits no legend underneath a 
name has room. Thou shalt have great rolls of
immortal verse ; and, in eagerness to write thy praises, 
all will assemble who compose in rhythm, whether 
bound or free. They will strive who shall be first. 
May I be the conqueror among them all, that I may 
write my name above the great story of those deeds. 

39 For who doth greater things than thou, whether 
in camp or forum ? Yet neither here nor there hast 
thou either greater or lesser praise. Just as when a 
true pair of scales is loaded with equal weights— one 
that, so often as it has to carry a balancing load on 
either side, wavers unsteadily with each pan lower in 
turn — it sinks no more on this side than it rises 
on that. 

45 For whether it be the fickle populace roaring in 
division, there will be none to appease it like thee ; 
or be it an angry juror to be soothed, thy words will 
avail to make him mild. Neither Pylos nor Ithaca 
can claim to have had sons as great in Nestor or in 
Ulysses, high ornament of a humble town, though 
the old man lived on while Titan ran for three 
lifetimes through his cycle of fruit-bringing seasons, 
and the other roved fearlessly through unknown 
cities where Earth is shut in by Ocean's bounding 
waves. He faced the bands of Cicones in fi^ht and 
drave them back. The Lotus could not ensnare 
and turn aside his course. No match for him was 
Neptune's son that dwelt on the cliffs of Aetna 
whose eye was ravaged when the wine of Maron 
made it close. He bore the winds of Aeolus o'er 
the calmed realm of Nereus. He visited the savage 
Laestrygonians and Antiphates, whose lands the cool 
waters of renowned Artacie lave. Him only could the 
cup of cunning Circe not transform, though she was 
the offspring of the Sun and skilled to change man's 
proper shape by herbs and spells. He came also to 
the dark fastnesses of the Cimmerians, whose eyes 
never saw the day dawn brightly, whether Phoebus 
ran above or underneath the Earth. He saw how, 
subjected to the nether rule of Pluto, the gods' great 
sons laid down the law for flitting shades; and in 
swift- rowed ship he passed the Sirens' coast. He 
sailed a strait bordered by death on either hand; 
yet neither did the swoop of Scylla's six mouths 
dismay him when the monster stole out amid the 
waves that her wild dogs infested, nor did raging 
Charybdis destroy him after her wont, whether rising 
aloft in surge from the abyss or baring the sea-bed 
with the breach in her waters. I should not be mute 
on the profaning of the pastures of the far-travelling 
Sun, nor the passion and rich fields of Atlas' daughter 
Calypso, nor Phaeacia's land, the term of his woful 
wandering. And whether these adventures were 
encountered amid the lands we know or report 
has placed his wanderings in some new world, in 
suffering he may be first, but thou must be first in 
eloquence. 

82 Again, than thou there is none with a surer 
mastery of the arts of war : where should be drawn 
a protecting fosse before a camp, after what fashion 
chevaux de frise be driven in to stop the foe, round 
what spots 'tis best to draw the enclosing earthwork 
where the earth throws up a gush of sweet spring 
water, so that approach thereto may be easy for thy 
men and uphill for the enemy. How the soldiery may 
be kept robust by unceasing struggles for distinction, 
to prove whose hand discharges best the slow stake 
or the speedy arrow or the obstinate pilum breaking 
all down before it; whose hand has skill to hold in 
the swift horse with bridle tightened and let the 
reins fly free for the slow, and, changing about, now 
gallop on a straight course or at pleasure make him 
wheel in the circle's narrow round ; who excels in the 
shield-guard on right or left side as lie will, as on 
the one or the other quarter comes the spear's heavy 
rush, or in getting the swift sling home upon the 
mark. Next, as soon as the struggle of venturous 
battle comes, and under confronting standards the 
lines prepare to close, then thou wilt not fail in 
forming the order of the fight, whether it be needful 
for the troops to draw into a square, so that the 
dressed line runs with level front, or it be desired to 
sunder the battle into two several parts, so that the 
army's right may hold the left and its left the right 
and the twofold hazard yield a double victory. 

106 But my verses do not stray among unproved 
distinctions. I sing what wars have shown. I have 
a witness in the gallant soldiery of vanquished 
lapydia; a witness also in the cunning Pannonian, 
scattered far and wide over the icy Alps ; a witness 
too in the poor son of Arupium's fields, whom whoso 
sees unbroken by advanced old age will wonder less 
at the three lifetimes of the Pylian legend. For 
while the old man accomplishes his long life's period 
Titan will have brought round a hundred fruitful 
years. Yet unaided he scruples not to fling his 
nimble limbs above the fleet steed's back and sit 
there its master, with a strong grasp on the reins. 
Thou wast commander when Domator that never 
turned his back before stooped his free neck to take 
the Roman chains. 

118 Nor wilt thou rest content with this. What is 
coming is greater than what has come to pass^ as 
I have ascertained from signs that tell the truth, 
which Amythaon's Melampus could not match. Thou 
hadst just donned the garb of flaming Tyrian tissue 
as the day dawned that ushers in the fruitful year, 
when, brighter than before, the Sun lifted his head 
from the clear waves and the warring winds held 
their wild gusts in check, nor did the winding rivers 
pursue their wonted courses. Nay, even the whirling 
sea stood still, its waves at peace. And no bird is 
there that glides across the airs of heaven or savage 
four-footed beast that gi*azes in woodland thickets 
but gave lavish silence to thy prayers. Jupiter 
himself rode in airy chariot through the void unto 
thy side, and left Olympus, neighbour of the sky 
He gave himself with ear attentive to thy prayers, 
and granted all, bowing the head that never lies ; 
and when fire touched the altar, its glad flare rose on 
high above the piled-up incense. 

135 n ow at the god's call press thou on to great 
achievements. Not the same triumphs should there 
be for thee as others. Confronting Gaul shall not 
detain thee in combat close at hand, nor the wide
territory of martial Spain, nor the wild land whereon the 
settlers of Thera lodged, nor that where flows the 
Nile or the king's stream Choaspes, or where the 
rushing Gyndes which maddened Cyrus lies parched, 
or the waters of Oroatis in the plains of Aracca, nor 
where is the wild Araxes which Tamyris made the 
boundary of her kingdom, or where the Padaean, on 
whose savage tables is often spread a cannibal repast 
dwells in remotest lands, the neighbour of Phoebus, 
and where the Hebrus and the Tanais water the 
Getae and the Magyni. 

147 Why do I trifle thus ? Wherever the Ocean's 
deep encompasses the earth, no land will meet thee 
with opposing force. The Briton whom Roman 
prowess has not vanquished is reserved for thee, 
and the other portion of the world, with the Sun's 
path set between. For the Earth rests on circum- 
ambient air, and into five parts is its whole sphere 
distributed. And two are always ravaged by icy 
cold. There the earth is buried in thick shade and 
no waters slip to the end of their liquid course, but 
are frozen hard to thick ice and snow, since Titan 
there never shows his rising orb on high. But the 
middle is always underneath the heat of Phoebus, 
whether he moves nearer to the earth on his summer 
orbit or whether swiftly he hastes to conclude the 
winter day. So there the earth does not rise in ridges 
before the deep-driven plough, nor do the cornfields 
yield grain or the lands pasture. No god tends the 
fields, whether Bacchus or Ceres, nor do any animals 
live in those parched regions. Between it and both 
the frozen zones is set a fruitful one, ours and the 
region that is opposite this land of ours, attempered 
to likeness by the neighbouring climes that hold them 
in on either side, one air destroying all the other's 
power. Hence comes it that our year turns kindly 
through its seasons ; hence that the bull has learned 
to bow his neck to the yoke and the limber vine to 
climb the lofty bough, and year by year the cornfield 
yields its ripe fruit to its shearer, and iron ploughs 
the earth and bronze the sea; yea, and towns rise 
high with their pile of walls. So, then, when thy 
deeds shall claim their glorious triumph, thou only 
shalt have the name of great in either world. 

177 I am not strong enough to advertise such glory, 
no, not if Phoebus himself dictate my song. Thou 
hast in Valgius one that can gird himself for these 
great achievements : none other comes nearer to 
immortal Homer. 'Tis not that toil with me leaves 
leisure to be passed in indolence, albeit Fortune, as is 
her wont, harasses me with her enmity. For though 
once I had a lofty mansion glittering with wealth, and 
rows of yellow furrows, pouring treasure into barns 
that could not cope with the plenteous harvests, and 
serried lines of cattle browsing on the hills, enough 
for owner and overmuch for thief and wolf, now 
naught but the sense of loss remains. For pain 
springs up again as Grief remembers and reminds 
me ever of the bygone years. 

190 But though harder times befall and I be 
stripped of what is left me, my Muse will not fail 
to tell of thee. Nor shall Pierian homage only 
be accorded thee. For thee I would venture 
over the rushing billows of the sea, though the 
stormy friths swelled with hostile winds; for thee 
I would await alone the serried squadrons' charge 
or commit this poor body to the flames of Aetna. 
All that I am is thine. If thou have but a little 
thought of me, however small it is, if thou do but 
have it, neither Lydia's monarchy nor the renown of 
great Gylippus would be more to me, nor would I 
choose rather to surpass the writings of the son of 
Meles. But if my verse, whether all of it or less, 
shall be well known to thee or else but cross thy 
lips, the Fates shall set no bounds to my singing 
of thee. Nay, more even then when the grave 
has covered my bones, whether the appointed day 
haste betimes to bring me a speedy end or a long 
life awaits me, whether a change of shape shall make 
me a horse that is trained to scour the unyielding 
plains or I am a bull, the pride of the slow herd, or 
a bird, borne on wings through the flowing air, none 
the less, when lapse of ages receives me back among 
mankind, will I weave verse to append to the pages 
I had begun to write on thee. 


SULPICIA'S GARLAND 
VIII 

Great Mars, it is thy Calends, and Sulpicia is dressed 
for thee. Come thyself, if thou hast wit, from heaven 
to see her. Venus will pardon this ; but thou, rough 
god, have a care lest to thy shame thy arms drop from 
thy wondering hold. From her eyes, when he would 
burn the gods amain, doth fierce Love kindle his 
torches twin. Whatsoever she does, whithersoever she 
turns her steps, Grace follows her unseen to order 
all aright. Hath she loosed her hair? Then flowing 
locks become her. Hath she dressed it? With dressed 
hair she is divine. She fires the heart if she chooses 
to appear in gown of Tyrian hue ; she fires it if she 
comes in the sheen of snowy robes. Like her, on 
everlasting Olympus, bounteous Vertumnus w f ears a 
thousand garbs, and wears with grace the thousand. 
Of all maids only she deserves to receive from 
Tyre soft wool twice drenched in costly juice, 
that hers should be all that the rich Arab, tiller of 
the perfumed field, reaps from his fragrant lands ; 
yea, all the pearls that the swart Indian, hard by the 
waters of the Dawn, picks from the red seas' shores. 
Sing of her on the festal Calends, ye Pierian nymphs, 
and thou too, Phoebus, proud of thy tortoise lyre. 
This rite recurring shall be hers for many a year. No 
maid is worthier of the favours of your quire. 


IX 

Boar, spare the youth I love, whether thy haunt is 
the plain's fair pastures or the deep woodland of the 
hills, nor think it thy part to whet thy hard tusks for 
the fray. Let Love be his guard and keep him safe 
for me. . . . But the dame of Delos draws him far 
away with love of venery. Oh that woods might 
wither and dogs be extinct! How mad, how
senseless is this whim to hurt soft hands, setting the 
tinchel round the thick-clad hills! What pleasure 
is it to steal into the lairs of wild beasts and to score 
thy white legs with the bramble's barbs? Yet still, 
Cerinthus, so I may share thy roamings, I will
myself carry the twisted nets across the fells, myself 
follow the tracks of the fleet deer and undo the iron 
collar of the rushing hound. Then, then would 
forests please me when it can be shown I have been 
in thy arms, my love, beside the very toils. Then, 
though the wild boar come up to the nets, he shall 
depart unharmed lest he break the joys of eager 
love. But now without me let there be no loving; 
but, lad, be chaste, and lay chaste hands upon the 
nets as Diana's rule enjoins, and let any she that 
creeps by stealth into my place of love fall among 
savage wild beasts and be torn piecemeal. But do 
thou leave the love of hunting to thy sire and haste 
back quickly to my arms. 


X 

Come hither and drive out the tender maid's disease, 
come hither, Phoebus, with thy pride of unshorn hair. 
Hear me and hasten ; and henceforth, Phoebus, thou 
shalt ne'er regret to have laid thy healing hands 
upon the fair. See to it that no wasting blight fall 
on the pallid form, nor disfiguring hue mark the 
feeble limbs. Yea, all the mischief, all the dread 
things we fear, let the rushing river-waters carry out 
into the main. Come, holy one, and bring with thee 
all essences, all chants that ease the body's sickness. 
And torture not the youth who fears that the maid 
will die, and offers prayers, past counting, for his 
mistress. Sometimes he prays, sometimes in grief 
that she is sick he utters fierce words against the 
eternal gods. Put fear aside, Cerinthus. God harms 
not lovers. Do thou love ever, and thy girl is safe. 
No need for weeping. Then fitlier will thy tears flow 
if ever she is angered with thee. But now she is 
wholly thine. In the kind maid's breast are only 
thoughts of thee, and a credulous company waits in 
vain upon her. Phoebus, be gracious. Great praise 
will be thy portion when by saving one life thou 
restorest two. Then famous and jubilant wilt thou 
be when in grateful rivalry both pay the debt they 
owe to thy holy altar. Then the company of good 
gods will call thee fortunate, and each desire thy 
own craft for himself. 


XI 

This day that made thee live for me, Cerinthus, shall 
be for me one to be hallowed always and set among 
the festivals. When thou wast born, the voices of 
the Fates proclaimed that now there was new slavery 
for woman, and bestowed proud sovereignty on thee. 
I burn more fiercely than them all, but joy, Cerinthus, 
in the burning, if within thy breast live fires caught 
from mine. May love like mine be thine, I pray 
thee, by our stolen raptures, by thine eyes and thy 
Birth-spirit. Great Genius, take this incense with a 
will, and smile upon my prayer, if only when he 
thinks on me his pulse beats high. But if perchance 
even now he sighs for another love, then, holy one, 
depart thou from that faithless altar. And, Venus, 
be not thou unjust; either let both alike be bound 
thy slaves or lift my shackles off. But rather let us 
both be bound, with a strong chain that no coming 
day can loose. The lad desires the same as 1, but 
conceals his longing more; he is ashamed to say 
the words aloud. But thou, Birth-spirit, a god and 
knowing all things, grant the prayer. What matter 
if his suit be uttered or unspoken ? 


XII 

Juno of the birthday, receive the holy piles of incense 
which the accomplished maid's soft hand now offers 
thee. To-day she is thine wholly; most joyfully she 
has decked herself for thee, to stand before thy 
altar a sight for all to see. 'Tis in thee, goddess, 
she bids us find the reason for this apparelling. Yet 
there is one that in secret she desires to please. 
Then, hallowed one, be kind, and let none pluck 
apart the lovers : but forge, I prithee, like fetters for 
the youth. Thus shalt thou match them well. To 
no maid be, to no man she might fitlier be 
thrall. And may no watchful guard surprise their 
wooings, but Love suggest a thousand ways for his 
outwitting. Bow assent and come in all the sheen 
of purple palla. They are making offering to thee # 
holy goddess, thrice with cake and thrice with wine, 
and the mother eagerly enjoins upon her child what 
she must pray for. But she, now mistress of herself, 
sues for another thing in the silence of her heart. 
She burns as the altar burns with the darting flames, 
nor, even though she might, would she be whole. 
Be grateful, Juno, so that, when the next year 
comes, this love, now of long standing, may be there 
unchanged to meet their prayers. 


SULPICIA 

XIII 

At last has come a love which. Rumour, it would 
shame me more to hide than to disclose to any one. 
Won over by my Muse's prayers, Cythera's queen 
has brought and placed him in my arms. What 
Venus promised she hath fulfilled. Let my joys be 
told by all of whom 'tis said that they have missed 
their own. Never would I choose to entrust my 
messages to tablets under seal, that none might read 
my thoughts before my lover. Nay, I love my fault, 
and loathe to wear a mask for rumour. Let all hear 
that we have met, each worthy of the other. 


XIV 

My hated birthday is at hand, to be kept all joylessly 
in the odious country and without Cerinthus. What 
is more pleasant than the town ? Would a grange 
be fit place for a girl, or the chill river of Arretium 
and its fields ? Rest now, Messalla, from thy
excessive zeal for me. Journeys, my kinsman, are oft 
ill-timed. They take me away, but here I leave my 
soul and heart, since force forbids my living mistress 
of myself. 


XV 

Dost thou know that the burden of that journey is 
lifted from thy girl's heart? Now she can be at 
Rome upon her birthday. Let us all, then, keep that 
day [with gladness], which comes to thee this time 
by unexpected chance. 


XVI 

It is a pleasant thought that now in thy unconcern 
thou dost allow thyself so much at my expense that 
I may not trip in some unhappy fit of folly. For thee 
toga and strumpet loaded with wool-basket may 
be worthier of thy preference than Sulpicia, Servius' 
daughter. But they are distressed in my behalf, to 
whom this is the greatest cause of pain, that I may 
yield my place to an ignoble rival. 


XVII 

Cerinthus, hast thou any tender thought for thine 
own girl, now that fever racks her feeble frame ? Ah, 
I would not pray to triumph over the drear disease 
if I thought not that thou wouldst wish it too. How 
should it profit me to master sickness if thou canst 
bear my troubles with a heart unmoved ? 


XVIII 

My life, let me be no more to thee so hot a passion 
as few days ago methinks I was, if in my whole 
youth I have done any deed of folly of which I 
would own I have repented more, than leaving thee 
yesternight alone, through desire to hide the fire 
within me. 


XIX 

No woman shall filch thy place of love with me. 
such our covenant when first the love-tie joined us: 
Only thou dost please me ; save thee no girl in the 
city is beauteous to my eyes. And, oh, might I be 
the only one to think thee fair! Mayst thou be
unpleasing to all besides. So shall I be safe. No need 
for envy here ; far from me be the vaunts of the 
common herd; let the wise man keep his joy hushed 
up within his bosom. Thus shall I live happily in 
forest depths where foot of man has never worn a 
path. For me thou art repose from cares, light even in 
night's darkness, a throng amid the solitudes. Now, 
though a mistress be sent to Tibullus from the skies, 
she will be sent in vain, and desire be extinguished 
This I swear to thee by thy Juno's holy power ; for 
to me is she great above all gods beside. What mad 
thing am I doing? Alas ! surrendering my hostages. 
That was an oath of folly. Thy fears were my gain, 
Now wilt thou take heart, now fan my flames more 
boldly. This, alas ! is the mischief brought me by 
my chattering tongue. Now, do what thou wilt, I 
will remain thine always, nor flee from bondage to 
a mistress that I know, but will sit in my chains at 
the altar of holy Venus. She brands law-breakers 
and befriends the suppliant. 


XX 

Rumour says that my girl is oft unfaithful. Now 
could I wish my ears were deaf. These charges are 
not made without suffering for me. Why dost thou 
torture thus thy victim, bitter Rumour ? Peace ! 


DOMITIUS MARSUS 

Thee too, Tibullus, ere thy time hath Death's unfeeling hand 
Despatched to fare by Vergil's side to dim Elysium's land, 
That none should be to plain of love in elegy's soft lay 
Or in heroic numbers sweep with princes to the fray. 