I 

All present bush. We purify the crops and lands in 
the fashion handed down from our ancestors of old. 
Come to us, Bacchus, with the sweet grape cluster 
hanging from thy horns, and, Ceres, wreathe thy 
temples with the corn-ears. 

5 Upon this holy day let earth, let ploughman 
rest. Hang up the share and let the heavy labour 
cease. Loose from the yokes their straps; now by 
the well-filled manger must the oxen stand with
garlands round their heads. Let all things be at the 
service of the god; let no spinner choose to set her 
hand to the task of wool. Ye too I bid stand far 
away — let none be nigh the altar to whom Love's 
goddess gave her pleasures yesternight. The powers 
above ask purity. Clean be the raiment that ye 
come in, and clean the hands to take the waters from 
the spring. Mark how to the shining altar goes the 
holy lamb, and behind the white procession ; the olive 
binds their hair. 

17 Gods of our sires, we cleanse the farms, we 
cleanse the farming folk. Do ye outside our
boundaries drive all evil things. Let not our sown fields 
mock the reaping with defaulting blade. Let not 
our slow lambs fear the swifter wolves. Then the 
sleek rustic, full of trust in his teeming fields, will 
heap huge logs upon his blazing hearth ; and a young 
troop of home-born slaves, fair signs that show a 
lusty yeoman, will play about and build them huts of 
sticks before the fire. My prayers are heard. See in 
the favouring entrails how the liver-markings bear a 
message that the gods are gracious. 

27 Now from the old bin bring me out the smoked 
Falernians and loose the bands of the Chian jar. Let 
drinking be the order of the day. Now we keep 
holiday, and to be tipsy is no shame, nor to carry 
ill our unsteady feet. But let each one, as he drinks, 
cry, " Health to Messalla ! " and in every utterance 
be the name of the absent heard. 

33 Messalla, now the talk of all for thy triumph 
over the race of Aquitaine, whose victories cover 
thy unshorn ancestors with glory, hither come and 
breathe upon me while with my song I pay
thanksgiving to the powers that tend the fields. 

37 I sing the country and the country's gods. They 
were the guides when man first ceased to chase his 
hunger with the acorns from the oak. They taught 
him first to put the planks together and cover his 
humble dwelling with green leaves. They too, 'tis 
told, trained bulls to be his slaves, and placed the 
wheel beneath the wain. Then savage habits passed 
away; then was the fruit-tree planted, and the
thriving garden drank the water from the rills. Then the 
golden grapes gave up their juices to the trampling 
feet, and sober water was mixed with cheering wine. 
From the country comes our harvest, when in 
heaven's glowing heat the earth is yearly shorn 
of her shock of yellow hair. Through the country flits 
the bee in spring-time, heaping the hive with flowers 
in her zeal to fill the combs with the honey sweet. 

51 Then first the countryman, sated with ploughing 
without cease, sang rustic words in time and tune ; 
and, full of meat, first composed a song on the dry 
oat-pipes to chaunt before the gods that his hands 
had dressed. And, Bacchus, it was a countryman 
that first dyed his skin with red vermilion and wound 
through the dance with unpractised art. It was he 
too that, offering from all his fold a gift to tell about, 
the he-goat, leader of the flock, gained increase for 
his scanty wealth. 

59 In the country the lad first made a circlet from 
the flowers of spring and placed it on the ancient 
Lares' head. Of the country too is the sheep that 
will ere long make trouble for gentle girls with the 
soft fleece it wears upon its glistening back. Thence 
comes the toil of women's hands, the weighed wool 
and the distaff, and the spindle that twists its work 
'twixt thumb and finger ; and weaving women in 
unremitting service to Minerva sing while the loom 
clatters as the clay weights swing. 

67 Desire too himself, they say, was born amid 
the fields, amid the cattle and the unbridled mares. 
There first he practised with prentice bow. Ah, 
me ! what expert hands has he now ! Nor are beasts 
his mark as heretofore. His joy is to pierce maids' 
hearts and make the bold man bite the dust. He 
strips the young of their wealth ; the old he forces 
to shameful speech at the threshold of an angrj 
fair. He guides the girl who stealthily steps by 
prostrate watchers and comes alone to her lover in 
the nighty high strung with fear, her feet feeling her 
path before her while her hand is advanced to find 
passage through the dark. 

79 Ah, wretched they upon whom our god bears 
hardly ; and happy is he on whom Love in his 
graciousness breathes gently. Come to our festal 
cheer, holy lord. But, prithee, lay aside thy arrows, 
and far from us put away thy burning torch. 

83 Do ye chaunt the god whom all adore, and 
loudly call him for your herd. Let each one call him 
for the herd aloud, but in a whisper for himself. Or 
aloud too for himself : for the merriment of the throng 
and the bent pipe's Phrygian note will drown the 
prayer. So take your sport. Now Night is yoking 
her team ; and on their mother's car follow the golden 
Stars, a capering troupe, while behind comes Sleep 
the silent, enwrapped in dusky wings, and black 
Visions of the night with wavering steps. 


II 

Let naught but good words pass our lips : the Birth- 
sprite cometh to the altar. Whoso art with us, man 
or woman, peace ! Let its fire burn the holy incense, 
burn the spices which the soft Arabian sends us from 
his wealthy land. Let the Genius come to view the 
offering to himself. Soft garlands must deck his 
hallowed locks ; his temples must drop with spikenard 
pure ; he must be filled with honey-cake and tipsy 
with neat wine. And to whatsoever thou askest, 
Cornutus, must he bow assent. See, quick ! Why 
laggest thou ? He bows, and thou must ask. I 
divine that thou wilt pray for thy wife's true love : 
by now methinks the gods have learnt this well. 
Thou wouldst not have rather for thine own all the 
fields in the whole world that stout yeomen plough 
with sturdy steers, nor for thine own all pearls soever 
that grow for India the blest by the red waters of the 
Eastern sea. 

17 'Tis done as thou dost pray. See, on rustling 
wings Love flies to thy side with yellow bands to 
bind thy spouse — bands never to be loosed till 
dragging age bring wrinkles to her brow and bleach 
her hair. May the sign come true, Birth-spirit, and 
bring them offspring, and may a troop of younglings 
play before thy feet. 


III

In country and farmhouse bides my girl, Cornutus. 
Ah, me ! he is iron who can stay in town. Venus 
herself has moved into the spreading fields and Love is 
learning the rustic speech of ploughmen. Oh, when I 
looked upon my mistress, how stoutly there with my 
sturdy hoe would I turn the fertile soil and follow 
the curved plough as a tiller of the fields, while the 
barren oxen forced the clods up for the sowing ! Nor 
would I murmur that the sun burned my slender 
limbs or that broken . blisters hurt my delicate 
hands. 

11 Apollo, too, the beautiful, fed the bulls of 
Admetus ; nor did his lute and hair unshorn avail 
him aught, nor could he cure his trouble by health- 
giving herbs. Love had triumphed o'er all resources 
of the healer's art. The god became accustomed 
to drive the kine from the byre, ['tis said] . . . and 
taught the way of mixing rennet with new milk, and 
the milky stream curdled at its touch. Then was the 
cheese-basket woven from the bulrushes' light stems, 
and hereand there through their interfacings a passage 
left for the whey. Oh, how often as he went through 
the fields, a calf in his arms, do they say, his sister 
met him and blushed ! Oh, how often, while he was 
singing deep in the valley, did the kine with their 
lowings rudely break in on the artistic verse ! Often 
did chiefs seek oracles from him in times of trouble 
and the company go home in disappointment from 
his temple. Often did Latona grieve for the
unkemptness of the sacred hair which before had been a 
marvel to his stepmother herself. Whoever had seen 
hi&head undecked and hair all loose would have asked 
indeed where were the locks of Phoebus. Where, 
Phoebus, is thy Delos now, and where thy Delphian 
Pytho ? Why, Love bids thee house in a humble cot. 

29 Happy the men of olden days, when they tell 
that gods eternal were not ashamed to be the open 
slaves of passion. Now is he the talk of all. But one 
that loves his girl would liefer be the talk of all than 
a god without a love. 

32 And thou, whosoever thou art, whom frowning 
Love now bids make warfare in my house . . , 

35 It is not love but booty that this iron age 
applauds. Yet booty is concerned in a multitude of 
ills. Booty buckles the armour of strife on the raging 
hosts; hence bloodshed comes, hence slaughter, and 
death approaches nigher than before. Booty bade 
men double the perils on the surging deep when it 
fitted the beaks of war to the rocking ships. 'Tis the 
freebooter who longs to seize upon the measureless 
plains, that on many an acre he may graze his
countless sheep. His fancy turns to foreign marbles, and 
through the quaking city his column is carried by a 
thousand sturdy teams. For him the mole confines 
the tameless sea, that unconcerned inside the fish 
may reck naught of the storm that blusters near. 
But in my feast's happy course let there be only the 
pottery of Samos or the slippery clay that Cumae's 
wheels have shaped. 

49 Alas ! I see that maidens' hearts are set upon 
the rich. Then come booty, if Love desires wealth, 
that my Nemesis may float in finery and step it 
through the city, in bravery a gift from me! Let 
her wear the gossamer robe which some woman of 
Cos has woven and laid it out in golden tracks. 
Let hers be the dusky pages that India scorches and 
the Sun's fire tans as he drives so near. Let the 
lands vie to give her their choicest dyes, Afric the 
crimson and Tyre the purple. 

59 What I say all know. That very man has now 
a kingdom who on the barbarians' platform has oft 
been forced to move his gypsumed feet. 

61 For thee, cruel field, that drawest Nemesis away 
from town, may Earth fail utterly to pay the grain 
she owes thee. And thou, soft Bacchus, planter of 
the pleasant grape-vine, do thou too, Bacchus, leave 
the vats that we have cursed. No one may bury 
fair maids 'mid dreary fields without a punishment. 
Thy new wine, Sire, is not worth this price. Oh, let 
the corn go, so there are no lasses in the country ; let 
acorns be our fare and water our drink in the olden 
way. Acorns were the food of the ancients, and 
they had love always wherever they were. What 
hurt to them if they had no furrows sown with seed ? 

71 Then to those on whom Love's god breathed 
kindly did gentle Venus bring open pleasures in the 
shady vales. No watchers were there, nor door to 
close against the anguished. If it be not wrong, old 
custom, I pray thee to, return. [Then . . . and let] 
rough limbs be clad in shaggy raiment. Now, if my 
love is under bolt and bar, it* but seldom I can see 
her, poor wretch, what comfort is there in a flowing 
toga ? Take me away ; I will plough the fields at 
a mistress's command. From chains and stripes my 
body shall not shrink. 


IV 

Here see I slavery and mistress waiting for me. 
Now, ancient freedom of my fathers, fare thee well. 
Yea, harsh slavery is my lot — chains to hold me and 
Love that never slackens the wretched prisoner's 
bonds, and burns me whether I have deserved to 
suffer or have done no wrong. Ah, how I burn ! 
Take the torch away, thou cruel girl. 

7 Oh, not to feel such pangs as these, would I were 
rather a stone on the bleak hills or cliff exposed to 
the frenzy of the winds on which beats the
shipwrecking wave of the desolate sea. Now bitter is 
the day and bitterer still the shades of night, for 
every moment is steeped in acrid gall. 

13 Nor doth elegy help or Apollo, inspirer of my 
song. Her hollowed palm is ever stretched out for 
gold. Away, ye Muses, if ye have no aid for the 
lover; I court you not that I may sing of wars. Nor 
tell I of the goings of the Sun, nor how when she 
has accomplished her circuit the Moon wheels her 
horses and returns. Easy access to my lady is all I 
seek by song. Off with ye, Muses, if the song is of 
no avail. 

21 Yet by crime and slaughter must I get gifts, 
that I may not lie lamenting before closed doors. 
Or I must seize the ornaments that hang in holy 
temples. But Venus must I pillage first. Tis she 
that prompts the evil deed, 'tis she that gives me a 
grasping mistress; so let her feel my sacrilegious 
hands. 

27 Ah, ruin to all who gather the emeralds green 
or with Tyrian purple dye the snowy sheepskin. 
The stuffs of Cos and the bright pearl from out 
of the red seas sow greed in lasses. Tis these 
have made them evil. From these hath the door 
learned to feel the key, and the dog been set to 
guard the threshold. But if thou comest with a 
great fee, keys are no hindrance, and the very dog 
is mute. Ah, that god w T ho gave beauty to the 
covetous girl, what a pearl did he bring to a 
herd of mischiefs ! From this comes the noise of 
weeping and of bickering. This, in brief, is the 
cause that Love now roams the earth dishonoured. 

39 But thou, that dost shut out lovers whom gold has 
vanquished, may wind and fire sweep off the wealth 
that thou hast gained. Nay, may the young then see 
thy house ablaze, and none bestir himself to put water 
on the fire. Or, if 'tis death that comes to thee, let 
there be none to mourn thee or come with offering to 
thy woful burial. But she that has been kind and free 
from greed, though she live a hundred years, shall be 
wept by the burning pyre. And some aged man in 
homage to his ancient love will yearly place a
garland on her mounded tomb, and, as he goes, will 
say : u Sleep well and peacefully, and above thy 
untroubled ashes let the earth be light. " 

51 Tis a true warning ; but of what help is the 
truth to me? I must ply my love as she ordains. 
Yea, if she bid me sell the home of my forefathers, 
then, gods of the household, ye must stoop to be 
labelled at her word. All Circe's, all Medea's 
potions, all the herbs that the land of Thessaly 
bears, even the hippomanes which drips from the 
yearning mare when Venus breathes passion into 
unbridled herds, yea, a thousand herbs beside may 
my Nemesis mingle in the draught, and, so she 
look kindly on me, I will drink. 


V 

Be gracious, Phoebus ; a new priest sets foot within 
thy temple. Hither I bid thee come with lyre and 
song. Now, I prithee, let thy fingers sweep the 
singing strings ; now tune thy song to a loyal paean. 
And while they heap the altar, come to thy rites 
thyself, thy brows encircled with triumphal bay. 
Come bright and beautiful ; now don thy treasured 
raiment; now duly comb thy flowing locks. Be as 
men tell thou wast when, Saturn driven from his 
throne, thou sangest a paean for victorious Jove. 

11 Thou seest from afar the things to come. The 
augur whose soul is given up to thee knows Avell 
what means the note of the bird that foresees what 
is to be. 'Tis thou dost guide the lots ; through thee 
divines the reader of the inward parts, whensoever 
a god has set his marks on the glistening entrails. 

15 With thee her guide, the Sibyl who sings Fate's 
hidden will in six-foot measure hath never played the 
Romans false. Phoebus,, grant leave to Messalinus 
to touch the seeress' holy scroll, and teach him
thyself the meaning of her strains. 

19 'Twas she that gave responses to Aeneas after 
the hour when, as story tells, he bore away in his arms 
his sire and household gods, never dreaming that a 
Rome Avould be, when from the deep he turned his 
eyes in sorrow on Ilion and its gods ablaze. 

23 (Not yet had Romulus traced the walls of the 
Eternal City wherein was no abiding for his brother 
Remus. But still on a grassy Palatine browsed the 
kine, and lowly cabins stood upon the heights of Jove. 
There, drenched with milk, was Pan beneath the holm- 
oak's shade, and Pales shaped from wood by rustic 
knife ; and on the tree, in quittance of the roving 
shepherd's vow, the prattling pipe hung sacred to 
the woodland god — the pipe with its ever-dwindling 
rows of reeds, whose wax joins stalks each lesser 
than the last. But where now spreads the quarter of 
Velabrum, a small skiff stirred the waters as it plied 
across the shallows. There oft a lass who would 
please some rich keeper of a herd was ferried on 
holidays to her swain, and with her came back the 
gifts of a thriving farm, cheese and the white lamb 
of a snowy ewe.) 

39 " Aeneas never-resting, brother of Cupid ever on 
the wing, whose exiled barks carry the holy things 
of Troy, now doth Jove allot to thee the fields of 
Laurentum, now doth a hospitable land invite thy 
wandering gods. There shall divinity be thine 
when Numicius' ever- worshipped waters pass thee 
to heaven, a god of the native-born. See, o'er the 
weary ships is Victory hovering. At last the haughty 
goddess comes to the men of Troy. Lo, I see the 
fire blaze from the Rutule camp. Now, savage Turnus, 
I foretell thy fall. Before my eyes is Laurentum's 
fortress and Lavinium's wall, and Long Alba, which 
Ascanius leads his host to found. Now thee too, 
Ilia, priestess whom Mars is to find fair, I see departed 
from the Vestal hearth. I see thy secret bridal, thy 
snood cast upon the ground, and, left upon the banks, 
the arms of the eager god. Now, while ye may, 
bulls, crop the grass of the Seven Hills. Ere long 
this will be a great city's site. Thy nation, Rome, 
is fated to rule the earth wherever Ceres looks from 
heaven upon the fields she tends, both where the 
gates of dawn are opened and where in tossing waters 
the Ocean river bathes the Sun-god's panting team. 
Then shall old Troy be a marvel to herself, and own 
that in this far journey ye did well for her. 'Tis 
truth I sing; so may I ever eat the holy bay
unharmed and everlasting maidenhood be mine' 

65 So sang the seeress, and called thee to her, 
Phoebus, and tossed before her face her streaming hair, 

67 AH that Amalthea, all that Herophile of
Marpessos foretold, all the warnings of Grecian Phyto 
and hers of Tibur who carried her holy scrolls of 
destiny through the stream of Anio and in dry bosom 
bore them home. . . . These told that a comet should 
appear, the evil sign of war, and how that thick on 
earth should fall the stony shower. And they say 
that trumpets and the clash of arms were heard in 
heaven, and sacred groves rang with the coming rout. 
From the images of the gods poured the warm tears ; 
and kine found tongue and spake of the coming 
doom, Yea, from the very Sun ebbed the light, and 
the clouded year saw him yoke dim horses to his 
car. 

79 So was it once; but thou, Apollo, kind at last, 
whelm monstrous things beneath the savage deep. 
Let the bay crackle loud as it kindles in the holy 
flames, an omen telling that the season shall be 
blest and holy. When the bay has given propitious 
sign, rejoice, ye farmers : Ceres will fill with ears 
your straining barns. And smeared with must the 
countryman will stamp above the grapes till the 
great tanks and butts can hold no more. And 
drenched in wine the shepherd will chaunt the feast 
of Pales, the shepherd's holiday. Ye wolves, be ye 
then far from the fold. Full of drink, he will fire 
the light straw heaps in the appointed way, and leap 
across the sacred flames. Then shall his dame bear 
offspring, and the child take hold of his father's ears 
to snatch the kiss ; nor shall the grandsire find it 
irksome to watch by his little grandson's side, nor, 
for all his years, to lisp in prattle with the child. 

95 Then in the god's service the folk shall recline 
upon the grass where fall the flickering shadows of 
some ancient tree, or of their garments spread out 
canopies and tie them up with garlands, wreaths 
also round the goblets where they stand. Then each 
for himself will pile high the feast and festal board, 
cut sods the table and cut sods the couch. Here the 
tipsy lad will heap curses on his lass, such as erelong 
he will hope and pray may turn to naught. Aye, he 
who is now so savage with his dear will weep when 
he is sober, and swear that his wits had gone astray. 

105 Phoebus, by thy good leave, let bows and 
arrows perish, so Love may rove unarmed upon the 
earth. 'Tis an honest craft ; but since Cupid took to 
carrying arrows, how many, ah me, has that honest 
craft made smart ! And me beyond the rest. For a 
year have I been afflicted from his stroke, and, siding 
with my malady (for the pain itself is pleasure), I sing 
unceasingly of Nemesis, apart from whom no verse 
of mine can find its words or proper feet. 

113 But do thou, damsel (for guardian gods watch 
over poets), be warned in time, and spare thy sacred 
bard, that I may tell of Messalinus when before his 
chariot he shall bear the conquered towns, the prize 
of war, wearing the bay wreath, while his soldiery, 
with wild bay round their brows, loudly chaunt the cry 
of triumph. Then let my dear Messalla afford the 
throng the sight of a father's love, and clap his hands 
as his son's car passes by. Phoebus, grant this ; and 
so be thy locks for aye unshorn, and thy sister ever 
a maiden pure. 


VI 

For the camp is Macer bound. What shall become 
of gentle Love ? Must he go with him and stoutly 
bear his arms about his neck ? And, weapons in hand, 
will he be at the gallant's side whether his path 
lie over the distant mainland or the tossing seas ? 
Young sir, I prithee, brand the rebel that has left thy 
haunts of peace : call back the truant to thy banners. 

7 But if thou art merciful to soldiers, here is 
one will be a soldier too, and bring himself
refreshing water in his helm. I am off to the camp. 
Farewell to Love, farewell to lasses. I too am stout 
of limb; in my ears too the trumpet's note is sweet. 

11 Brave is my speech ; .but when I have uttered 
the brave bravado, the shutting of a door strikes the 
bold words from my lips. How often have I sworn 
that to its threshold I would return no more ! For 
all" my valiant swearing, my foot comes back itself. 
Fierce Love, oh, if this could be, I would see thine 
arms destroyed, the arrows broken and the torches 
quenched. Thou rackest me with anguish : thou 
forcest me to curse myself and in impious speech 
to vent the frenzy of my soul. Ere now I would 
have ended my miseries in death ; but fond Hope 
keeps the spark alive, whispering ever that to-morrow 
things will mend. 

21 'Tis Hope sustains the farmer; to ploughed 
furrows Hope entrusts the seed for fields to render 
back with heavy usury. She takes the fowl in noose, 
the fish with rod, the slender hook first hidden by 
the bait. Hope comforts, too, the slave whom stout 
fetters bind. The iron clanks upon his legs, but still 
he sings at his task. Hope promises me that Nemesis 
shall be kind ; but she says Nay. Ah me ! worst not 
the goddess, cruel girl. 

29 Mercy, I pray thee, by the bones of thy sister, 
dead before her time ; so may the child sleep well 
beneath the gentle earth. For me she is divine ; to 
her tomb I will bring offerings and garlands wetted 
with my tears. To her grave will I fly and, sitting 
suppliant there, bewail my fate to her silent dust. 
Not forever will she bear with thee for making her 
votary weep. In her name I bid thee, be not cold 
to me, lest the slighted spirit send thee evil dreams 
and in thy slumbers thy mournful sister stand before 
thy bed, such as she was, when from the high
casement she fell headlong down and passed blood- 
spattered to the lakes below. I cease, lest I stir 
again my lady's bitter woe. I am not worth one 
cry of grief from her. 

43 Nor is it well that tears should mar those
speaking eyes. 'Tis the bawd that is my bane ; the girl 
herself is good. Phryne, the bawd, is killing me ; 
alas, as stealthily she passes to and fro with tablets 
hidden in her bosom. Many times, when from the 
hard threshold I recognise my mistress's sweet voice, 
Phryne denies she is at home. Often, when the night 
has been pledged to me, she brings message that the 
girl is sick or has been affrighted by some warning. 
Then I die with distress, and desperate fancy figures 
to itself in what and whose embraces my love is 
held. Then I call curses on thee, bawd. Thy life 
should be full enough of fears, if any part of what 
I pray is heard in heaven. 
