I 

Let others heap up their treasure of yellow gold ; 
let theirs be many acres of well-tilled ground ; let 
them live in constant fighting and alarms with the 
foeman at their gates, their slumbers routed by the 
outburst of the signal for the fray. But let the humble 
fortune that is mine lead me along a quiet path of 
life, so my hearth but shine with an unfailing fire. 

25 May it now be mine to live for myself, to live 
contented with my little, and no more be ever vowed 
to distant marchings ; but when the Dog-star rises, to 
escape its heat beneath some tree's shade with a rill 
of water fleeting past, nor think it shame to grasp 
the hoe at times or chide the laggard oxen with the 
goad, nor a trouble to carry homewards in my arms a 
ewe lamb or youngling goat forgotten by its dam and 
left alone. 

7 When the time is ripe, let me plant the tender 
vines and the stout orchard trees with my own deft 
hands, a countryman indeed. Nor let Hope disappoint
me, but ever vouchsafe the heaped-up corn 
and rich new wme to fill my vat. For I bend in 
worship wherever flowery garlands lie on deserted 
tree-stock in the fields or old stone at a crossway, and 
of all my fruit that the fresh season ripens I set the 
first before the country's guardian god. Ceres of the 
yellow hair, let my farm produce the spiky wreath to 
hang before thy temple doors. And in the fruit- 
laden garden be red Priapus set as watch, to scare 
the birds with cruel billhook. 

19 Ye too, my Lares, who watch over an estate, now 
poor though thriving once, receive your gifts. Then 
a slam heifer was peace-offering for uncounted beeves • 
a lamb is now the humble victim for my narrow plot 
of ground. A lamb shall fall for y OU , and round it the 
country youth shall shout : « Huzza ! Send us good 
crops and wine I" ° 

33 But ye, ye thieves and wolves, have mercy on 
my scanty flocks ; from great herds must ye take your 
spoil. Here is all I have to make the yearly expiation 
tor my herdsman, and to sprinkle over Pales the milk 
that makes her kind. Be with me, Gods : nor scorn 
gifts from a humble board and on clean earthenware 
Earthen were the drinking-cups which the ancient 
yokel made himself, modelling them from pliant 

41 I ask not for the riches of my sires or the gains 
which garnered harvests brought to my ancestors of 
yore. A small field's produce is enough— enou-h if 
1 may sleep upon my bed and the mattress ease my 
hmbs as heretofore. What delight to hear the winds 
rage as I he and hold my love safe in my gentle clasp ; 
or, when the stormy South Wind sheds the chilling 
showers to follow the road of untroubled sleep, the 
ram my lullaby ! This be my lot ; let him be rightly 
rich who can bear the rage of the sea and the dreary 
rain Ah, sooner let all the gold and all the emeralds 
perish from the world than any maiden weep for my 
depart.
 
53 'Tis right for thee, Messalla, to campaign on 
land and sea that on thy house's front may show the 
spoils of foemen : I am a captive fast bound in the 
bonds of a lovely girl ; I sit a janitor before her 
stubborn doors. I care not for glory, Delia dear ; 
let me only be with thee, and I will pray folk call me 
sluggard and idler. 

59 May I look on thee when my last hour comes ; 
may I hold thy hand, as I sink, in my dying clasp. 
Thou wilt weep for me, Delia, when I am laid on the 
bed that is to burn ; thou wilt give me kisses mingled 
with bitter tears. Thou wilt weep : thy breast is not 
cased in iron mail ; in thy soft heart there is no 
stubborn flint. From that burial none, neither youth 
nor maiden, will return with dry eyes home. Do 
thou hurt not my spirit; but spare thy loosened hair 
and spare thy soft cheeks, Delia. 

69 Meantime, while Fate allows, let us be one in 
love. Soon will Death be here with his head cowled 
in dark. Soon will steal on us the inactive age, 
nor will it be seemly to play the lover or utter soft 
speeches when the head is hoar. Now let gay love 
be my pursuit while it is no shame to break a door 
down and a joy to plunge into a brawl. 'Tis here I 
am brave captain and private. Begone, ye trumpets 
and ensigns! take wounds to the men of greed, and 
take them wealth. I, safe on my garnered heap, will 
look down on hunger as I look down on wealth. 


II 

More wine ; let the liquor master these unwonted 
pains, that on my wearied eyes may fall triumphant 
sleep ; and when the wine god's copious fumes have 
mounted to my brain, let none awake me from unhappy 
love's repose. For a cruel watch has been set upon 
my girl, and the door is shut and bolted hard against 
me. Door of a stubborn master, may the rain lash 
thee, and bolts flying at Jupiter's command make 
thee their mark. Door, now yield to my complaining
and open only unto me, and make no sound as 
thy hinge turns stealthily to let me in. And if my 
frenzy has ever called ill upon thee, have pardon ; 
let that fall, I pray, on my own bead. 'Tis right 
thou shouldst remember all that I rehearsed in
suppliant tones when on thy posts I laid my flowery 
garlands. 

15 Do thou too, Delia, trick the guard with no 
faint spirit. Be bold : Venus herself aids the stout- 
hearted. She helps when a lad tries a strange 
threshold or a lass pushes in the prong to lift the 
bar from the door. She shows how to creep down 
stealthily from the pillowed bed ; how so to set the 
foot that it makes no sound ; how in the husband's 
presence to exchange the speaking nods and hide 
love's language under a code of signs. Nor shows 
she this to all, but to them whom neither indolence 
delays nor fear forbids to rise in the murk of night. 

25 Lo, I in my wanderings in distress through all 
the city in the dark [meet with no harm. The goddess 
shields me] and lets no one cross my path to wound 
my body with his steel or seize my garments for his 
prize. Whosoe'er hath love in his heart may pass in 
heaven's keeping where he will ; no ambush should 
lie fear. The numbing cold of winter's night brings 
me no hurt, no hurt the heavy downpour of the rain. 
My sufferings here will harm me not, if Delia but 
unbar the door and summon me silently with a 
finger's snap. 

33 Be not busy with your eyes, be you man or 
woman that we meet. Love's goddess wills her 
thefts should not be seen. Nor frighten us with noisy 
feet nor seek our names, nor bring the flashing torch- 
lights near us. And if any have beheld us unawares, 
let him hide the knowledge and aver by all the gods 
that he remembers not. For if any man turn prater, 
he shall find that Venus is the child of blood and 
whirling seas. 

41 And yet none such will thy spouse believe, 
as the honest witch has promised me from her 
magic rites. I have seen her drawing stars from the 
sky. Her spells turn the course of the hurrying 
stream. Her chaunting cleaves the ground, lures the 
spirit from its tomb, and down from the warm pyre 
summons the bony frame. Now with magic shrillings 
she keeps the troops of the grave before her ; now 
she sprinkles them with milk and commands them 
to retreat. At will she chases the clouds from the 
frowning heavens ; at will she musters the snow in 
the summer skies. Only she, men say, holds the 
secret of Medea's deadly herbs, only she has lamed 
the wild hounds of Hecate. 

53 She framed me a charm to enable thee to 
deceive : chaunt it thrice and spit thrice when the 
spell is done. Then will he never trust any one in 
aught that is said about us, nay, not even his own 
eyes if he see us on the pillowed bed. Yet from 
others thou must keep away ; since all else will he 
perceive ; only to me will he be blind. 

59 cc why should I trust her ? " Surely it was she, 
none other, said that by spells or herbs she could
unbind my love. She cleansed me with the torch rite, 
and fei the clear night a dusky victim fell to the gods 
of sorcery. But my prayer Avas not that my love might 
pass entirely, but that it might be shared. I would 
not choose to be without thee if I could. That man 
was iron who, when thou mightest have been his, 
chose rather to follow war and plunder. Let him 
chase Cilieia's routed troops before him, and pitch his 
martial camp upon captured ground; let foik gaze 
upon him as he sits his swift charger, from head to foot 
a tissue of silver and gold, if only with thee, my Delia, 
I may put the oxen in the yoke and feed my flock on 
the familiar hill; and, so my young arms may hold 
thee fast, I shall find soft slumber even on the rugged 
earth. 

75 What gain is it to lie on Tyrian cushions with 
Love untoward, when night must pass in waking and 
weeping? For then can neither pillows of feathers 
nor broidered coverlets nor the sound of purling waters 
bring us sleep. 

79 Have I wronged the godhead of Venus by aught 
that I have said, and does my tongue now pay the 
penalty of sin ? Can they say of me that I have 
wickedly invaded an abode of gods and plucked the 
garland from the sacred altar ? Am I guilty, then I 
will not shrink to fall prone before her temple and to 
press kisses on its hallowed threshold, nor to crawl 
on suppliant knees along the earth and strike my 
head against the sacred door-posts, 

87 Yet thou who dost now rejoice and laugh at my 
woes must look to thyself ere long; the god will 
not always persecute but one. I have seen the man 
that had mocked the hapless loves of the young, in 
later time put his aged neck in the halter of Venus 
and make soft speeches for himself in quavering 
tones and turn his hands to dressing his hoary hair : 
nor did he blush to stand before the doors of the 
beloved or to stop her maid in the middle of the 
forum. Round him boys and young men pressed in 
a jostling crowd, and spat each into his own soft 
bosom. 

97 Be gentle with me, Venus: my soul is ever 
thy loyal slave. Why burn thine own corn in thy 
passion ? 


III

Without me will ye go, Messalla, across the Aegean 
wave, yet thinking, oh, I pray, both chief and staff of 
me. Phaeacia holds me back, sick in a foreign land. 
Keep off* thy greedy hands, I pray, black Death. 
Black Death, I pray thee keep them off No mother 
have I here to gather the burned bones to her
grieving bosom ; no sister to lavish Assyrian perfumes on 
my ashes and weep with hair dishevelled by my tomb. 
Nor any Delia, who, ere from the city she let me go, 
inquired, they say, of every god. From the boy's 
hands thrice did she lift a sacred lot, and from the 
three did the boy make answer to her that all was 
sure. 

13 All promised a return ; yet did nothing stay 
her from looking back in tears and terror on my 
journey. Yea, even I her comforter, after I had 
given my parting charge, sought still in my disquiet 
for reasons to linger and delay. Either birds or 
words of evil omen were my pretexts, or there was 
the holy day of Saturn to detain me. How often, 
when my foot was on the road, said I that, stumbling 
at the gate, it had warned me of disaster ! Let no 
man venture to depart w r hen Love says nay ; else 
shall he learn that a god forbade his going. 

23 What help is there now for me in thy Isis, Delia ? 
what help in the bronze that was clashed so often in 
thy hands ? Or what avails it that in thy dutiful
observance of her rites, as I remember well, thou didst 
bathe in clean water and sleep apart in a clean bed ? 

27 Now aid me, goddess, now — that thou canst heal 
saith a crowd of painted panels in thy temples — that 
my Delia may pay the nightly vigils of her vow, sitting 
all swathed in linen before thy holy door, and twice 
in the day be bound to chaunt thy praise with loosened 
tresses for all to mark amid the Pharian throng. And 
be it mine many times to stand before the shrine of 
my sires' Penates and offer incense, as the months 
come round, to the old Lar of my home. 

35 How well lived folk in olden days when Saturn 
was the king, before the earth was opened out for 
distant travel ! Not as yet had the pine-tree learned 
to swim the blue sea wave or surrendered the spreading
sail to belly before the wind ; nor, seeking gain in 
unknown lands, had the vagrant seaman loaded his 
bark with foreign wares. That was a time when the 
sturdy bull had not bent his neck to the yoke, nor 
the tamed horse champed the bit. No house had 
doors ; no stone w r as planted on the land to set fixed 
boundaries to men's estates. The very oaks gave 
honey; and with milky udders came the ewes
unbidden to meet the careless sw r ain. Then were no 
marshalled hosts, no lust of blood, no battles ; no 
swords had been forged by the cruel armourer's 
ruthless skill. But now that Jupiter is lord, there 
are wounds and carnage without cease ; now the sea 
slays, and a thousand ways of sudden death. 

51 Spare me, Sire. No broken oaths make me to 
fear and tremble, no wicked speech against the holy 
gods. But if even now I have fulfilled my destined 
span, let a stone be set above my bones, graven with 
this legend : 

HERE LIES TIBULLUS, RAVISHED BY DEATH'S HAND, 
MESSALLA COMRADING o'er SEA AND LAND. 

57 But me, for I have been ever pliable to gentle 
Love, shall Venus' self escort to the Elysian fields. 
There never flags the dance. The birds fly here and 
there, fluting sweet carols from their slender throats. 
Untilled the field bears cassia, and through all the land 
with scented roses blooms the kindly earth. Troops 
of young men meet in sport with gentle maidens, and 
Love never lets his warfare cease. There are all, on 
whom Death swooped because of love ; on their hair 
are myrtle garlands for all to see. 

67 But the Wicked Place lies buried in the gulf of 
night ; and round it black rivers roar. There storms 
Tisiphone, wild snakes her unkempt hair; and this 
way and that way flees the godless crowd. Then at 
the gate upon black Cerberus hiss his w r ide-mouthed 
snakes as he keeps his sentry-watch before the doors 
of bronze. There is Ixion, who dared to offer force to 
Juno : on the swift wheel whirl his guilty limbs. And 
there is Tityos stretched over nine roods of land ; on 
his black vitals feed the birds that never tire. There 
too is Tantalus, and pools around him ; but on the 
instant, ere he drinks, the wave flies from his raging 
thirst. And the offspring of Danaus for slighting 
the godhead of Venus carry the waters of Lethe* 
into leaking butts. There let all be who have
profaned my love and who have wished me lingering 
campaigns.

83 But thou, I pray, continue chaste. Let the aged 
dame sit ever by thy side to keep thy honour true. 
She shall tell thee stories when the lamp is in its 
place, as she draws the long yarn from the loaded 
distaff, while all around the maids bend over the
toilsome task till sleep steals upon them and the work 
drops from the tired hand. Then of a sudden let 
me come, and no one bring the news of me ; but 
may I seem to have come from heaven to thy side. 
Then, just as thou art, with long hair all disordered 
and feet unsandalled, run to meet me, Delia. For 
this I pray ; thus may that radiant Day-star bless my 
sight, borne by the rosy horses of the shining Dawn.


IV 

"Priapus, tell me— so may the sheltering shade be 
thine, nor thy head be harmed by sun or snows— 
what cunning of thine captures the handsome lads ? 
Sure thou hast no glossy beard nor well-kept hair 
Isaked thou art all through the cold of stormy winter, 
naked through the parching season of the Doff-star's 
heats." ° 

7 Thus I ; and thus to me replied the country child 
of Bacchus, the god armed with the curving billhook ■ 
9 " O beware of trusting thyself to the gentle 
band of boys ; for they furnish always some valid 
ground for love. One pleases, for he keeps a 
1 Here, and elsewhere, a general term for the world below. 
tight hand on his horse's rein ; another drives the 
calm water before a breast of snow. This one takes 
you with his brave assurance, that one by the maiden 
shame that guards his cheeks. 

15 a Perchance at first he will refuse thee ; but let 
not this dishearten thee. Little by little his neck 
will pass beneath the yoke. Length of time teaches 
lions to submit to man; with length of time w r eak 
water eats through rock. The year's flight ripens 
the grapes on the sunny hillside ; the year's flight 
carries the radiant signs along their round of change. 

21 " Be not afraid to sw T ear. Null and void are the 
perjuries of love ; the winds bear them over land and 
the face of the sea. Great thanks to Jove ! The 
Sire himself has decreed no oath should stand that love 
has taken in the folly of desire. Dictynna too allows 
thee to assever by her arrows, and Minerva by her hair. 

27 " But if thou art slow, thou wilt be lost. Youth 
fleets how quickly ! Time stands not idle, nor returns. 
How quickly does the earth lose its purple hues ! how 
quickly the tall poplar its beauteous leaves ! How 
neglected is the horse, when the lot of Aveak age 
overtakes him, that once shot free from the barriers 
of Elis ! I have seen a young man on whom later 
years were closing round mourning for his folly in the 
daj^s that had fled. Cruel gods ! The snake sheds his 
years, and is young : but the Fates grant no respite to 
beauty. Only Bacchus and Phoebus have youth
everlasting ; of either god are unshorn tresses the glory. 

39 " Do thou yield to thy lad in aught that he is 
minded to attempt : love wins most by compliance. 
Nor refuse to go with him, though far be his purposed 
journey and the Dog-star bake the land with parching 
drought, though, fringing the sky with hues of purple, 
the rain-charged bow threaten the coming storm. 
Should he wish to fly over the blue waves in a boat, 
take the oar thyself and drive the light bark through 
the sea. Nor grieve to undergo rough labour or if thy 
hands are chafed by tasks to which they are strange. 
If round the deep glen he would place the ambush, 
then, so thou canst pleasure him, let thy shoulders 
not refuse to bear the hunting nets. If he would 
fence, thou wilt try thy light hand at the sport, and 
often leave thy side unguarded, that he may win. 

53 "Then will he be gentle with thee; then thou 
mayst snatch the precious kiss : he will struggle, 
but let thee snatch it. He will let thee snatch at 
first; but later will he bring it for the asking, and 
presently even he will be fain to hang upon thy neck. 

57 " But now, alas ! our perverse age plies wretched 
crafts. Now gentle lads have learned to look for gifts. 
Whoever thou art that first didst teach the sale of 
love, may an unhallowed stone weigh heavy on thy 
bones. 

61 " Love the Pierid maidens, lads, and gifted 
poets ; to no golden presents let the Pierian maids 
succumb. Verse keeps the lock of Nisus purple. 
Were verses not, no ivory would have shone on Pelops' 
shoulder. He whom the Muses tell of shall live, 
while earth bears* oaks, sky stars, and rivers water. 
But he who has no ear for the Muses, who sells 
his love — let him follow the car of Ops of Ida and 
traverse, a vagabond, three hundred towns and slash 
the parts he slights to Phrygian measures. Venus 
herself allows love's blandishments their play. She 
sides with piteous weeping and suppliant complaints." 

73 These things did the god's voice utter for me 
to sing to Titius ; but them doth Titius' wife forbid 
him to remember. So let him listen to his dear ; 
but do ye throng to my school whom some crafty 
lad with many wiles treats ill. Each of us has his 
proper glory. Let slighted lovers seek advice 
from me ; to all my doors are open. A time shall 
come when round the master of the lore of Venus 
shall crowd the attentive young and take the old 
man home. 

81 Alas ! what lingering torture is this love for 
Marathus : helpless is my skill, and helpless all my 
cunning. Spare me, I pray thee, boy, lest I become a 
byword, when folk shall laugh at my useless teaching: 

V 

I was angry. I vowed I could bear our severance 
well. But now my proud vaunting has left me far 
and far away. For I am driven as a top that springs 
before the lash over the level ground, whirled by a 
quick boy's practised art. 

5 Bring brands and tortures for the untamed 
creature, that he may have no love of talking loud 
hereafter : quell his wild utterances. 

7 Yet spare me, by the bonds of our stealthy 
union, I entreat thee, by our love and the head that 
has lain by mine. It was I, they say, whose vows 
snatched thee from peril when thou layest exhausted 
in sickness* gloomy hold. It w r as I that scattered all 
about thee the cleansing sulphur, the beldame first 
chaunting her magic spell. I appeased the cruel 
Dreams that had thrice to be honoured with offering
of holy meal, that they might work no harm. 
In woollen headdress and ungirdled tunic I made 
nine vows to Trivia in the stilly night. All have I 
paid ; but another hath now my love. He is the
fortunate one, and reaps the fruit of all my prayers. Yet 
I used to dream that, if thou wert spared, there would 
be a happy life for me. Madman ! a god said No. 

21 "In the country" I said, "I will live. My 
Delia shall be there to keep watch upon the grain, 
while the threshing-floor winnows the harvest in the 
blazing sun ; or she shall watch the grapes in the 
brimming trough when the quick feet tread the 
gleaming must. She shall learn to count the flock ; 
she shall teach the prattling serf-child to play on a 
loving mistress' lap. To the god that tends the 
country she will know what gifts to offer — for vines 
a cluster, spiked ears for cornfield, drink offering 
for flock. All folk shall she direct, and all things 
be her care. I shall love to be but a cipher in the 
house. Hither shall come my own Messalla. From 
chosen trees shall Delia pull him down sweet fruit. 
In homage to his greatness she shall give him zealous 
tendance, and prepare and carry him the repast,
herself his waiting-maid." 

35 Such were my dreams and prayers, now tost from 
East Wind unto South over all Armenia's scented 
land. 

37 Often have I sought to banish love's troubles 
with strong drink ; but pain turned all the wane to 
tears. Often have I held another in my arms ; but on 
the very brink of delight Love bade me think of my 
mistress and forsook me. Then the woman, departing;
declared me bewitched, and spread the tale (oh, 
shame !) that my love was versed in unholy arts. Not 
by charms does my lass do this. 'Tis her beauty, 
soft arms and golden hair bewitch me. Such was 
Thetis, the sea-blue Nereid, when in old days she 
rode on her bridled fish to Peleus of Haemonia. 

47 These charms have been my bane. A rich lover 
waits for the lass. So the crafty bawd is bent on 
my undoing. May the hag's food be mixed with 
blood. May the cup she puts to her gory lips be 
bitterly charged with gall. May ghosts flit round her 
always, bemoaning their fate, and the fierce vampire 
bird shrill from her roof ; and she herself, frantic from 
hunger's goad, hunt for weeds upon the graves and 
for bones which the wild wolves have left, and with 
middle bare run and shriek through the towns, and 
a savage troop of dogs from the crossways chase her 
from behind. 

57 Thus shall it be. A god gives the sign. There 
are powers to guard the lover, and Love shows no 
ruth, when left for a lawless tie. 

59 But do thou, Delia, with all speed leave the 
school of the grasping witch. There is no love that 
gifts will not master. The poor man will ever be 
at hand for thy service; he will come to thee first 
and cleave to thy tender side. The poor man, a 
trusty companion in the trooping crowds, will push 
below with his hands and make thee a way. The poor 
man [will take thee privately to the abodes of his 
friends] and himself unlace the boots from thy snowy 
feet. 

Alas! in vain do I sing ; no words will win her 
door to open. Nay, the hand that knocks upon it 
must be filled. 

69 But thou who art victor now must fear that 
my fate awaits thee. Chance turns lightly on her 
swift-rolling wheel. Not without reason even now 
some one stands patient on the threshold, looks oft 
id front, retreats, feigns to pass by the house, but 
soon runs back again alone, and hawks without cease 
before the very door. Stealthy Love has some scheme 
afoot. Take thy good, I beg, while thou mayst; for 
in calm waters is thy shallop. 


VI 

Love, thou dost always meet me with smiling visage 
to draw me on; but after that, poor wretch, I find 
thee frowning and angry. What hast thou to do 
with me, cruel boy ? Is there great glory to a god 
in laving snares for a man ? 

5 For the net is spread to take me ; now cunning 
Delia clasps a gallant covertly in the hush of night. 
She denies it, indeed, and on oath ; but 'tis hard to 
believe her. Thus touching me, too, she denies every 
hour to her husband. Poor wretch, it was I who taught 
her the ways of tricking her watchers, and now alas ! 
by my own craft am I sore bestead. Then learned she 
how to frame excuses for lying alone, and then how to 
turn the door without a sound from the hinges. Then I 
gave her juices and herbs to efface the dark signs which 
the teeth in love's communion imprint upon the flesh. 

15 And thou, the unwary mate of a faithless wife, 
watching me with the rest that she may never sin, 
take care that she talk not much or oft with young 
men, nor use nods to deceive thee, or recline with loose 
robe and bosom bare ; and see she take not wine on 
her fingers and trace signs on the table's round. 
Have thy fears when she goes out often, or if she say 
that she would witness the rites of the Good Goddess 
which no male must go nigh. 

23 But trust her to my keeping ; and I, I only., will 
attend her to that altar. Then for my eyes need I 
have no fear.

25 Many a time on the plea of judging her gem and 
its image can I remember how I touched her hand. 
Many a time my neat wine has put thee to sleep 
whilst I drank in triumph the sober cup of
substituted water. I did not wrong thee of purpose — 
forgive me, now I own it — 'twas at Love's bidding. 
And who may fight against a god? It was I — nor 
will I blush to speak the truth — whom thy dog was 
menacing the whole night through ! 

33 What good is a gentle wife to thee ? If thine 
own treasures thou canst not guard, the key is vainly 
turned in the door. Her arms are round thee ; but 
her sighs are for another, an absent love. And of a 
sudden she feigns the throes of headache. 

37 Thou shouldst trust her to my keeping. Then I 
recoil not from torturing stripes, nor shrink from 
shackles on my feet. Then far.be ye all who dress 
your hair with art and whose togas fall slack with 
copious folds. And let whosoever meets us, that no 
sin may be his, [stand aloof or pass by another road.] 

43 That this be done doth God himself command ; 
and this hath the great priestess revealed to me with 
voice inspired. She, when Bellona's impulse drives 
her, fears in that frenzy neither searching flames nor 
twisted scourge. Fiercely with axe in hand she hacks 
at her own arms. With the gushing blood is the 
goddess sprinkled ; but she goes without scathe. 
Erect with wounds on her breast, erect with the spit 
standing out from her side, she chaunts the words of 
fate that the great goddess prompts. " See to it that 
ye do no despite to the maid whom love doth guard; 
lest hereafter a great mischief lesson you to your woe. 
If any touch her, his fortune shall waste as the blood 
doth from my wound, and as these ashes are scattered 
by the wind." 

55 And for thee, my Delia, she named a punishment.
If notwithstanding thou shouldst sii<, I pray 
let her be merciful. Not for thyself do I spare thee. 
It is thy aged mother moves me; before her golden 
nature sinks my wrath. She brings me to thee in 
the dark, and in fear and trembling secretly and 
silently she joins our hands. Long life to thee still, 
dear dame. Did but heaven allow, to thy stock of 
years would I add my own. I will love thee always, 
and thy daughter for thy sake ; whatever she does, 
she is of thy blood after all. Only teach her to be 
chaste, though no band of the matrons' fillets
confines her hair, nor their long robe her feet. 

69 And for me let there be hard terms; let me 
never praise a woman without her flying at my eyes, 
and if she should think I have done her wrong, let 
me be taken by the hair, though I be guiltless, and 
pitched forward down the steep. I would not wish 
to strike thee, Delia, but if such madness come to 
me, I would pray to have no hands. Yet be not 
chaste through cruel fear, but by loyal heart ; and 
when absent, let love on thy side keep thee safe for 
me. . . . 

77 [The faithful have their reward.] But she whom 
no one has found true, thereafter poor and bowed 
with age draws out the twisted yarn with shaking 
hand and for hire fastens firm the leashes to the loom 
and pulls and cleans the handfuls of snowy wool. The 
troops of young are glad at heart to see her plight, 
and declare that she deserves to suffer so many woes in 
age. Venus from her throne on high Olympus looks 
upon her weeping, and bids us mark how sharp she 
is with the faithless. Upon others, Delia, let these 
curses fall : but let us twain still be pattern lovers 
when our hair is white. 


VII 

Of this day sang the Parcae as they span the thread 
of doom which no god can untwist — that this 
should be the day to put the folk of Aquitaine to 
rout, to make the Aude to tremble, by a valiant 
soldiery overpowered. So hath it eome about. The 
men of Rome have seen new triumphs, and chiefs 
with shackles on their captive arms, whilst thou, 
Messalla, wearing the conqueror's bays, wast borne in 
ivory car by steeds of shining white. 

9 Not without me was thy glory won : witness 
Tarbellian Pyrenees and the shores of Ocean by 
Saintonge ; witness Saone and swift-running Rhone 
and great Garonne, with Loire, blue stream of the 
blonde "bribes of Chartres. 

13 Or, Cydnus, shall I sing of thee whose silent wave 
steals bluely through the waters of the still lagoon ? 
Or how with head that reaches to the clouds extends 
chill Taurus, the feeder of Cilicia's long-haired sons ? 
Why should I recount how from town to town
unharmed flies the white dove that the Syrians of 
Palestine revere ? How Tyre, first town that learned 
to trust the ship to the mercy of the wind, looks out 
from her towers across the vast sea-plain ? Or how, 
when Sirius splits the parching fields, through all 
the heats life-giving Nile is full in flood ? 

23 For what cause, Father Nile, or in what lands 
may I declare that thou hast hid thy head ? Because 
of thee thy Egypt never sues for showers, nor does 
the parched blade bow to Jove the Rain-giver. Thou 
art sung and worshipped, as their own Osiris, by 
the barbarous folk brought up to wail the ox of 
Memphis. 

29 It was Osiris' cunning hand that first made 
ploughs and vexed the young earth with the iron 
share. He first entrusted seed to the untried earth, 
and gathered fruits from unknown trees. He showed 
how to join the young vine and the pole, he how 
to lop its green leaves with the stern pruning-hook. 
For him the ripe grape-clusters, which rugged feet 
had crushed, first yielded up their pleasant tastes ; 
their juice taught men to guide the voice through 
changing strains, and bade untutored limbs move to 
a measure true. 

39 When the breast of the countryman is crushed 
with his heavy toil, it is the wine-god makes it over 
to gladness to be loosened from its bonds ; 'tis the 
wine-god brings relief to mortals in distress, though 
cruel shackles clank upon their legs. 

43 Harsh cares and grief are not for thee, Osiris, but 
dance and songs and lightsome love. Yea, flowers of 
many hues and brows with the berried ivy circled, 
and robe of saffron flowing over youthful feet, raiment 
of Tyre and sweet-singing pipe and the light basket 
with its mystery of holy things. 

49 Then hither come, and with a hundred sports 
and dances do honour to the Birth-sprite, and let 
wine in plenty bathe his temples. From his glistening
hair let the ointment drip, and on his head 
and neck let soft garlands hang. Thus come to us 
to-day, Birth-spirit ; and I will bring thee offering 
of incense and cakes sweetened with honey from the 
land of Mopsopus.

55 But for thee, my friend, let a progeny spring up 
to add fresh exploits to their sire's, and stand in their 
distinctions about the old man's chair. 

57 And let him not be silent on the great work 
of thy road whom the fields of Tusculum or white 
Alba's ancient homesteads keep from the city. For, 
heaped up through thy bounty, here is laid hard 
gravel, and there are flint blocks featly joined. The 
dweller in the country shall sing thy praise when he 
has come at night from the great city and brought 
his foot home without tripping. 

63 But thou, Birth-spirit, come to thy honours for 
many a year — come ever brighter and brighter still. 


VIII 

No one can hide from me the meaning of a lover's 
nod, nor the message of gentle tones and whispered 
words. Yet no lots help me, no liver with heaven's 
will acquainted, nor do birds' notes tell me of the 
things to come. 'Twas Venus' self that tied my arms 
with magic knots and taught me all with many stripes. 

7 Have done with concealments. The god has 
fiercer fires for those that he sees have fallen to 
him against their will. 

9 What advantage hast thou now in dressing the 
soft hair or shifting continually the arrangement of 
the tresses, what in beautifying cheeks with lustrous 
pigment, in having the nails pared by an artist's 
cunning hand ? In vain thy gowns, thy shawls 
are changed, and the tight loop squeezes the feet 
together. 'Tis the other charms, though she come 
with face untended and has spent no lingering skill 
on dressing her sheeny hair. 

17 Has some hag bewitched thee with her spells, 
or with blanching herbs, in the silent night hours ? 
Incantation draws the crops from the neighbour's 
field ; incantation checks the course of the angry 
snake; incantation seeks to draw the moon down 
from her car, and would do it but for the blows on 
the echoing bronze. 

23 Why do I complain, alas ! that spells or herbs 
have worked me woe ? Beauty needs no aid from 
sorcery. 'Tis touching the body does the harm, giving 
the long kiss, resting thigh by thigh. Yet do thou 
for thy part see thou art not uncompliant to the lad ; 
Venus visits harsh deeds with punishment. 

29 Ask for no presents : these should a hoary lover 
give, that soft arms may warm his chilly limbs. Gold 
is less precious than a lad whose face is bright and 
smooth, with no rough beard to rasp caresses. Under 
his shoulder place thy radiant arms, and thus look 
down on all the treasures of a king. Venus will find 
a way for stealthy commerce with the lad while he 
quivers, and would draw your tender bosoms ever 
closer, for giving wet kisses with quickened breath 
and struggling tongue and printing the teeth's marks 
on the neck. No stone or pearls will give her joy 
who sleeps alone and chill, and to no man is desirable. 

41 Ah, too late we call back love and youth when 
hoary eld has bleached the aged head. Then looks 
are studied. The hair is stained to disguise our 
years with dye from the nut's green husk. Then 
we task ourselves to pluck up the white hairs by 
the root and to carry home a face transformed, with 
the old skin gone. But do thou while thy life is 
still in its flowering springtide see^that thou use it. 
Not slow are its feet as it glides away. 

49 Nor torture Marathus. What glory is there in 
discomfiting a boy? Be hard, my lass, to the effete 
old. Spare the tender shoot, I pray. Naught ails 
him gravely ; 'tis from excess of passion comes the 
yellow stain upon his skin. See again, poor wretch, 
how often he heaps his piteous reproaches on the 
absent and all around is flooded with his tears. 

55 "Why dost thou slight me?" he complains. 
"The watch might have been baffled. Heaven itself 
gives the lovesick skill to cozen. I know the secret 
ways of love, how the breath may be taken gently, 
and how kisses may be snatched and make no sound. 
I can steal up e'en in the dead of night, and unseen 
unbar the door without a sound. But what do arts 
avail if the girl spurn the hapless swain and, cruel, 
fly from the very couch of love ? Then again when 
she promises and suddenly plays false, I must wake 
through a night of many woes. While I fondly 
think that she will come to me, in every stir I hear 
her footfall sounding." 

67 Shed tears no more, lad. Her heart is stone, and 
thy eyes are already worn and swelled with weeping. 
The gods, I warn thee, Pholoe, abhor disdain. "Twill 
be vain to offer incense to their holy fires. This is the 
Marathus that once made mock of wretched lovers, 
unwitting that behind him stood the god of
vengeance. Often, too, we have heard, he laughed at 
the tears of anguish and kept a lover waiting with 
pretences for delay. Now he abhors all coyness; 
now he hates every door that is bolted fast against 
him. But for thee, girl, unless thou cease to be proud, 
there is punishment in store. Then how wilt thou 
long that prayers might bring thee back to-day ! 


IX 

Why, if thou wast to wrong my helpless love, didst 
thou pledge thy faith to me before the gods but to 
break it privily? Unhappy! even if at first we hide 
the perjury, yet in the end comes Punishment on 
noiseless feet. Still spare him, powers above. 'Tis 
not unjust if for one sin against your godhead beauty 
should pay no forfeit. 

7 'Tis in quest of gain the countryman yokes his 
bulls to his good plough and plies his hard work on 
the land ; it is gain that the SAvaying ships pursue 
when the sure stars guide them through seas that 
the winds control. And by gifts has my lad been 
captured. But may God turn them to ashes and 
running water. 

13 Ere long he will make me full amends; his 
comeliness will be lost amid the dust and the winds 
that roughen his hair ; his face, his curls will be 
burned by the sun, and long travel will disable his 
tender feet. 

]7 How many times have I warned him: " Let 
not gold sully beauty ; under gold there often lurks 
a multitude of ills. Whosoever has let wealth tempt 
him to outrage love, with him is Venus fierce and 
obdurate. Rather burn my head with fire, stab my 
body with steel, and cut my back with the twisted 
scourge. And have no hope of concealment when 
thou art planning wrong. God knows of it, and lets 
no treachery stay hid. God himself has set [wine] 
within the reach of a tongue-tied servant, that 
with much strong drink his speech might How free. 
Heaven itself has bidden the lips that slumber had 
sealed to open and to speak unwillingly of deeds 
that should have lain in the dark." 

29 So used I to say to thee. Now I am ashamed 
that I wept as I spoke, that I fell at thy tender feet. 
Then thou wouldst swear to me that for no weight 
of precious gold or for pearls wouldst thou sell thy 
faith, nay, not if Campania's land were given thee 
as the price, or Falernum's fields that Bacchus tends. 
Such words could have robbed me of my certainty that 
stars shine in skies and that rivers run downward. 
Nay, more, thou wouldst weep ; but I unversed in 
deceit would ever fondly wipe the water from thy 
cheeks. 

39 What should I have done hadst thou not thyself 
been in love with a maid ? May she be fickle — 
fickle, I pray, taking pattern by thee. Oh, how 
oft in the late night, that none should be privy 
to thy wooing, did I myself attend thee with the 
light in my hand ! Often, when thou didst not hope 
for her, she came through my good offices, and stood 
hid, a veiled figure, behind the fast shut door. Then, 
poor wretch, was my undoing; I fondly trusted to 
Love : I might have been warier of thy snares. Nay, 
in my craze of mind I made verses in thy honour; 
but now I am ashamed for myself and the Muses. 
May the Fire-god shrivel those verses with devouring 
flame, or the river wash them out in its running 
waters. Go thou far hence whose aim is to sell thy 
beauty and to return with a great wage filling thy 
hand. 

63 And thou who durst corrupt the hoy with thy 
gifts, may thy wife unpunished make a constant jest 
of thee by her intrigues; and when the gallant is 
spent with he v furtive dalliance, let her lie by thee lax 
with the coverlet between. Let there be always 
stranger tracks upon thy bed, and thy house be always 
free and open to the amorous. Nor let it be said that 
her wanton sister can drain more cups or exhaust 
more gallants. She, folk say, prolongs her wine- 
bibbing revels till the wheels of the Light-bringer 
rise to summon forth the day. Than she could none 
lay out the night hours better, or arrange the different 
modes of love. 

65 But thy spouse has learned it all, and yet thou, 
poor fool, dost notice naught when she moves her 
limbs with an unaccustomed art. Dost thou think 
that it is for thee that she arranges her hair and 
through her fine tresses passes the close-toothed 
comb ? Is it thy beauty prompts her to clasp gold 
on her arms and come forth arrayed in Tyrian 
drapery? Not thee, but a certain youth would she 
have find her charming. For him she would consign 
to ruin thee and all thy house. Nor does she this out 
of depravity; but the dainty girl shrinks from limbs 
that gout disfigures and an old man's arms. 

75 Yet by him has my own lad lain. I could believe 
that he would mate with a savage beast. Didst thou 
dare, mad youth, to sell caresses that belonged to me 
and to take to others the kisses that were mine ? Thou 
wilt weep, then, when another lad has made me his 
captive and shall proudly reign in thy realm. 

81 In that hour of thy punishment I shall rejoice, 
and a golden palm-branch shall be put up to Venus 
for her goodness, with this record of my fortunes : 

TIBULLUS WHOM FROM TREACHEROUS LOVE, GODDESS, THOU DIDST UNBIND 
OFFERS THEE THIS AND BEGS THEE KEEP FOR HIM A THANKFUL MIND. 


X 

Who was the first discoverer of the horrible sword ? 
How savage was he and literally iron ! Then slaughter 
and battles were born into the world of men : then 
to grisly death a shorter road was opened. 

5 But perhaps, poor wretch, he is to blame in 
nothing, but we turn to our mischief what he gave 
us to use against the savage wild beast. This is the 
curse of precious gold; nor were there wars when 
the cup of beechwood stood beside men's food. 
There were no citadels, no palisades, and void of 
care the flock's commander courted sleep with his 
sheep of divers hue around him. 

11 In that age would I have lived nor known grim 
warfare or heard the trumpet-call with beating heart. 
Now am I dragged to war; and some foeman, maybe,
already bears the weapon that is to be buried in 
my side. 

15 Yet save me, Lares of my fathers ! Ye too did 
rear me when I ran, a little child, before your feet. 
And feel it not a shame that ye are made of but an 
ancient tree-stock. Such were ye when ye dwelt in 
the home of my grandsire long ago. Then faith Avas 
better kept, when a wooden god stood poorly garbed 
in a narrow shrine. His favour was won when a man 
had offered a bunch of grapes as first fruits, or laid 
the spiky garland on the holy hair. And one who 
had gained his prayer would with his own hands 
bring the honey-cake, his little daughter following 
with the pure honeycomb in hers. 

25 O Lares, turn the bronze javelins away from 
me [and as thankoffering for my safe return shall 
fall . . .] and a hog from the full sty, a farmer's victim. 
With it will I follow in cle m apparel, and bear the 
basket bound with myrtle, even as the myrtle binds 
my hair. Thus may I find favour in your eyes. Let 
another be stout in war and, Mars to aid him, lay 
the hostile chieftains low, that, while I drink, he 
may tell me of his feats in fighting and draw the 
camp in wine upon the table. 

33 What madness is it to call black Death to us 
by warfare ! It is ever close upon us : it comes
unseen on silent feet. Below there are neither corn- 
lands nor well-kept vineyards; only wild Cerberus 
and the ill-favoured mariner of the stream of Styx. 
There wanders a sallow throng beside the dusky 
pools with eyeless sockets and fire-ravaged hair. 

39 Nay, the hero is he whom, when his children are 
begotten, old age's torpor overtakes in his humble 
cottage. He follows his sheep, his son the lambs, 
while the good wife heats the water for his weary 
limbs. So let me live till the white hairs glisten on 
my head and I tell in old man's fashion of the days 
gone by. Let Peace in the meantime tend our fields. 
Bright Peace first led the oxen under curved yoke to 
plough. Peace made the vine plants grow and stored 
the grape juice that from the father's jars might 
pour wine for the son. In peace shine hoe and 
ploughshare ; but the grisly arms of the rugged 
soldier rust preys on in the dark. 

61 Then the yeoman drives back from the grove, 
himself half sober, with wife and offspring in his wain. 

63 Then love's war rages hotly ; and women 
lament that hair is torn and doors are broken. 
The fair weeps for the buffets on her tender cheek ; 
but the conqueror weeps too that his mad hands wei*e 
so strong; while freakish Love feeds the feud with 
bitter speeches, and sits in unconcern between the 
angry pair. Ah, he is stone and iron who would beat 
his lass : this is to drag the gods down from the sky. 
Be it enough to tear the light robe from her limbs, 
and to disorder the fair arrangement of her hair : 
enough to cause her tears to flow. Thrice happy he 
whose anger ca n make a soft lass weep ! But he 
whose hands are cruel should carry shield and stake 
and keep afar from gentle Venus. 

67 Then come to us, gracious Peace ; grasp the 
cornspike in thy hand, and from the bosom of thy 
white robe let fruits pour out before thee. 