[729] Such sights he admires on the shield of Vulcan, his mother's gift, and, though he knows not the deeds, he rejoices in their portraiture, uplifting on his shoulder the fame and fortunes of his children's children.[1] And while in the far distance such deeds befell, Saturnian Juno sent Iris from heaven to gallant Turnus, who as it chanced was then seated within a hallowed vale, in the grove of his sire Pilumnus. To him, with roseate lips, thus spake the child of Thaumas:
[6] "Turnus, that which no god had dared to promise to thy prayers, lo, the circling hour has brought unasked! Aeneas, leaving town, comrades, and fleet, seeks the Palatine realm, and Evander's dwelling. Nor does that suffice; he has won his way to Cory- thus' utmost cities, and is mustering in armed bands the Lydian country-folk. Why hesitate? Now, now is the hour to call for steed and car; break ofl" delay, and seize the bewildered camp!" She spake, and on poised wings rose into the sky, cleaving in flight her mighty bow beneath the clouds.* The youth knew her, and, raising his two upturned hands to heaven, with such words pursued her flight: " Iris, glory of the sky, who has brought thee down to me, wafted upon the clouds to earth? Whence this sudden brightness of the air? I see the heavens part asunder, and the stars that roam in the firma- ment. I follow the mighty omen, whoso thou art that callest to arms! " And with these words he went onward to the river, and took up water from the brimming flood, calUng oft on the gods and burden- ing heaven with vows.
[25] And now all the army was advancing on the ojen plain, rich in horses, rich in broidered robes and gold — Messapus marshalling the van, the sons of Tyrrhus the rear, and Turnus their captain in the centre of the line: — even as Ganges, rising high in silence with his seven peaceful streams, or Nile, when his rich flood ebbs from the fields, and at length he is sunk into his channel. Here the Teucrians descry a sudden cloud gathering in black dust, and dark- ness rising on the plains. First cries Caicus from the rampart's front: " What mass, my countrymen, rolls onward in murky gloom? Quick with the sword! Serve weapons, climb the walls! The enemy is upon us, ho! " With mighty clamour the Teucrians seek shelter through all the gates and man the ramparts. For so at his departure, Aeneas, bravest of warriors, had charged; were aught to chance meanwhile, they should not dare to array their line or trust the field; let them but guard camp and walls, secure behind their mound. Therefore, though shame and wrath prompt to conflict, yet they bar the gates and do his bidding, awaiting the foe under arms and within covert of the towers. Turnus, as he had flown forward in advance of his tardy column, with a following of twenty chosen horse comes ujon the city unobserved: a Thracian steed, spotted with white, bears the prince, and a golden helm with crimson crest guards his head. " Gallants, is there one, who with me will be first against the foe to — lo! " he cries, and whirling a javelin sends it skyward — the prelude of battle—and advances proudly o'er the plain. His comrades take up the shout, and follow with dreadful din; they marvel at the Teucrians' craven hearts, crying: "They trust not themselves to a fair field, they face not the foe in arms, but they hug the camp." Hither and thither he rides wildly round the walls, seeking entrance where way is none. And as when a wolf, lying in wait about a crowded fold, roars beside the pens at midnight, enduring winds and rains; safe beneath their mothers the lambs keep bleating; he, fierce and reckless in his wrath, rages against the prey beyond his reach, tormented by the long-gathering fury of famine, and by his dry, bloodless jaws: —even so, as he scans wall and camp, the Rutulian's wrath is aflame; resentment is hot within his iron bones. By what device shall he essay entrance? By what path hurl the prisoned Teucrians from their rampart, and pour them on the plain? Hard by the camp's side lay the fleet, fenced about with mounds and the flowing river; this he assails, calling for fire to his exalting comrades, and with hot haste fills his hand Vvith a blazing pine. Then indeed they fall to, spurred on by Turnus' presence, and all the band armed them with murky torches. Lo! they have stripped the hearths; smoking brands fling a pitchy glare, and the Fire-god wafts to heaven the sooty cloud.
[77] What god, ye Muses,' turned such fierce flames from the Teucrians? Who drove away from the ships such vast fires? Tell me; faith in the tale is old, but its fame is everlasting. In the days when on Phrygian Ida, Aeneas was first fashioning his fleet and preparing to sail the deep seas, the very Mother of gods, 'tis said, the Berecyntian queen, thus spake to mighty Jove: " Grant, O son, to my prayer, what thy dear mother asks of thee, now lord of Olympus. A grove I had upon the mountain's crest, whither men brought me offerings, — a pine-forest beloved for many years, dim with dusky firs and trunks of maple. These, when he lacked a fleet, I gave gladly to the Dardan youth; now anxious fear tortures my troubled breast. Relieve my terrors, and let a mother's prayer avail thus much, that they be overcome neither by stress of voyage nor by blast of wind. Be it a boon to them that they grew upon our hills."
[93] To her replied her son, who sways the starry world: " O mother, whither dost thou summon fate .'' Or what seekest thou for these of thine .'' Should hulls framed by mortal hand have immortal rights? And should Aeneas in surety traverse unsure perils? To what god is such power allowed? Nay, when, their service done, they one day gain an Ausonian haven, from all that have escaped the waves, and borne the Dardan chief to the fields of Laurentum, will I take away their mortal shape, and bid them be goddesses of the great sea, like unto Doto, Nereus' child, and Galatea, who cleave with their breasts the foaming deep." He said; and by the waters of his Stygian brother, by the banks that seethe with pitch in black swirling abyss, he nodded assent, and with the nod made all Olympus tremble.
[107] So the promised day was come, and the Destinies had fulfilled their appointed times, when Turnus' outrage warned the Mother to ward off the brands from her sacred ships. Then first there flashed upon the eyes a strange light, and from the Dawn a vast cloud was seen to speed athwart the sky, with Ida's choirs in its train ;i thereon through the air fell an awful voice, filling the Trojan and Rutulian ranks: " Trouble not, ye Teucrians, to defend my ships, nor take weapons into your hands. Turnus shall have leave to burn up the seas sooner than my sacred pines. Go ye free; go, goddesses of ocean; the Mother bids it." And at once each ship rends her cable from the bank, and like dolphins they dip their beaks and dive to the water's depths; then as maiden forms — O wondrous portent! — they emerge in like number and bear out to sea.
[123] Amazed were the hearts of the Rutulians; Messapus himself was terror-stricken, his steeds affrighted; and the hoarsely murmuring stream is stayed, as Tiberinus turns back his footsteps from the deep. But fearless Turnus lost not heart; nay, he raises their courage with his words — nay, he chides them: " 'Tis the Trojans these portents assail; Jupiter himself has bereft them of their wonted succour; they await not Rutulian sword and fire. Thus the seas are pathless for the Teucrians, and hope of flight there is none. One half the world is lost to them, but the earth is in our hands: in such thousands are the nations of Italy under arms. Naught do I dread all the fateful oracles of heaven whereof these Phrygians boast: to Fate and Venus all claims are paid, in that the Trojans have touched our rich Ausonia's fields. I too have my fate to meet theirs — to cut down with the sword a guilty race that has robbed me of my bride! Not the sons of Atreus alone are touched by that pang, nor has Mycenae alone the right to take up arms. ' But to have perished once is enough! ' Nay, to have sinned once had been enough, so that henceforth they should loathe utterly well-nigh all womankind — these men to whom this trust in a sundering rampart, these delaying dykes — slight barriers against death — afford courage!  Yet have they not seen Troy's battlements, the work of Neptune's hand, sink in flames? But ye, my chosen, who of you makes ready, at the sword's point, to hew down the rampart and rush with me on their bewildered camp? I need not the arms of Vulcan nor a thousand ships, to meet the Trojans. Let all Etruria join them forthwith in alliance. Darkness and cowardly theft of their Palladium, with slaughter of guards on the citadel-height, let them not fear; nor shall we lurk in a horse's dusky womb! In broad day, in the sight of all, I mean to gird their walls with fire. I will make them nowise think they have to do with Danaans and Pelasgic chivalry, whom Hector kept at bay till the tenth year. Now, since the fairer part of the day is spent, for what remains, gallants, joyfully refresh yourselves after your good service, and be assured that we are preparing for the fray."
[159] Meanwhile charge is given to Messapus to blockade the gates with posted sentries, and to encircle the battlements with fires. Twice seven Rutulians are chosen to guard the walls with soldiers, but on each attend an hundred men, purple-plumed and sparkling with gold. To and fro they rush, and take their turns, or stretched along the grass, drink their fill of wine and upturn bowls of bronze. The fires burn bright, and the warders spend the sleepless night in games.
[168] On this scene the Trojans look forth from the rampart above, as in arms they hold the summit; in trembling haste they test the gates and link bridges and battlements, sword in hand. Mnestheus and valiant Serestus urge on the work, whom father Aeneas, should misfortune ever call, left as leaders of the warriors and rulers of the state. Along the walls the whole host, dividing the peril, keeps watch, and serves in turns, where each should mount guard.
[176] Nisus was guardian of the gate, most valiant of warriors, son of Hyrtacus, whom Ida the huntress had sent in Aeneas' train with fleet javelin and light arrows. At his side was Euryalus — none fairer among the Aeneadac, or of all who donned the Tro- jan arms — a boy who showed on his unshaven cheek the first bloom of youth. A common love was theirs; side by side they would charge in the fray; now too they together were mounting sentry at the gate. Nisus cries: " Do the gods, Euryalus, put this fire in our hearts, or does his own wild longing l)ecome to each man a god? Long has my heart been astir to dai"e battle or some great deed, and peaceful quiet con- tents it not. Thou seest what faith in their fortunes possesses the Rutulians. Few are their gleaming lights; relaxed with wine and slumber, they lie prone; far and wide reigns silence. Learn then what I ponder, and what purpose now rises in my mind. People and senate — all cry that Aeneas should be summoned, and men be sent to take him sure tidings. If they promise the boon I ask for thee — for to me the glory of the deed is enough — ■ methinks beneath yonder mound I may find a path to the walls and fortress of Pallanteum." Dazed was Euryalus, smitten with mighty love of praise, and thus at once speaks to his fiery friend: " Dost thou shrink then, Nisus, from linking me with thee in this high emprise? Shall I send thee alone into such great perils? Not thus did my sire, the old warrior Opheltes, train me as his child amid Argive terrors and the travails of Troy, nor thus at thy side have I played my part, following high-souled Aeneas and his utmost fate. Here, here is a soul that scorns the light, and counts that fame, whereto thou strivest, cheaply bought with life."
[207] To this Nisus: " Of thee, surely, I had no such fear, nay, nay, 'twere a sin — so may great Jupiter, or whoso looks on this deed with favouring eyes, bring me back to thee in triumph! But if — as oft thou seest in like hazards — if some god or chance sweep me to disaster, I would that thou survive; thy youth is worthier of life. Let there be one to commit me to earth, rescued from battle or ransomed at a price; or if, as oft befalls, some chance deny this, to render rites to the absent and the honour of a tomb. Nor let me, my child, be the cause of such grief to thy poor mother, who, alone of many mothers, has dared to follow thee to the end, nor heeds great Acestes' city."" But he: "Vainly dost thou weave idle pleas, nor does my purpose nov/ change or give way. Hasten we!" he said, and therewith rouses the guards. They come up, and take their turn; he, quitting his post, walks by Nisus' side as they seek the prince.
[224] All creatures else throughout all lands were soothing their cares in sleep, and their hearts were forgetful of sorrows: but the chief Teucrian captains, flower of their chivalry, held council on the nation's weal, what they should do, or who now should be messenger to Aeneas. They stand, leaning on their long spears and grasping their shields, in the midst of camp and plain.  Then Nisus and Euryalus together eagerly crave speed}' audience; the matter, say they, is weighty and will requite the pause, Iulus was first to welcome the impatient pair, and to bid Nisus speak. Then thus the son of Hyrtacus: "Listen, ye men of Aeneas, with kindly minds, nor let this our offer be judged by our years. Relaxed with wine and slumber, the Rutulians lie silent; our own eyes have marked the ground for strata- gem, where it opens in the forked way by the gate nearest the sea. The line of fires is broken, and black smoke rises to the sky. If ye permit us to use the chance, and seek Aeneas and the walls of Pallanteum, soon shall ye see us here again, laden with spoils after mighty slaughter has been wrought. Nor will the way deceive us as we go. Down the dim valleys in our frequent hunting we have seen the outskirts of the town and have come to know all the river."
[246] Then Aletes, stricken in years and sage in council: " Gods of our fathers, whose presence watches ever over Troy, not utterly, despite all, do ye purpose to blot out the Trojan race, seeing that ye have brought us such spirit in our youths and such unwavering souls." So saying, he caught both by shoulder and hand, while tears rained down his cheeks and face. " What, sirs, what guerdon shall 1 deem worthy to be paid you for deeds so glorious? The first and fairest heaven and your own hearts shall give; then the rest shall the good Aeneas straight- way repay, and the youthful Ascanius, forgetful never of service so noble." " Nay," breaks in Ascanius, "I, whose sole safety lies in my sire's return, I adjure you both, O Nisus, by the great gods of the house, by the Lar of Assaracus, and by hoary Vesta's shrine — all my fortune, all my trust, I lay upon your knees; recall my father, give him back to sight; with him recovered all grief vanishes. A pair of goblets will I give, wrought in silver and rough with chasing, that he took when Arisba was vanquished; and two tripods, two great talents of gold, and an ancient bowl that Dido of Sidon gave. But if it be our lot to take Italy, to wield a victor's sceptre and to assign the spoil, thou hast seen the horse and the armour wherewith Turnus rode, all in gold — that same horse, the shield and the crimson plumes will I set apart from the lot, thy reward, O Nisus, even now. Moreover my father will give twice six matrons of choicest beauty, and men captives, each with his armour, and, therewith too, whate'er domain King Latinus himself holds.  But thee, oh youth revered, whom my age follows at nearer distance, at once I take all to my heart, and embrace as my comrade in every chance No glory shall be sought for my own lot without thee; be peace or be war on hand, in thee shall be my chiefest trust in deed and in word."
[280] "To him thus spoke Euryalus in reply: " Never shall time prove me unmeet for such bold em- prise, so but Fortune prove kind, not cruel. But from thee, above all thy gifts, this one thing I ask. A mother I have, of Priam's ancient line, whom neither the Ilian land nor King Acestes' city could keep, poor soul, from faring forth with me. Her now I leave without knowledge of this peril, be it what it may, and without word of farewell, because — night and thy right hand be witness — I could not bear a mother's tears. But do thou, I pray, comfort the helpless, and relieve the desolate. Let me take with me this hope in thee; more boldly shall I meet all hazards."
[292] Touched to the heart, the Dardanians shed tears — fair Iulus before them all, and the picture of filial love touched his soul. Then thus he spoke: " Be sure that all shall be worthy of thy mighty enterprise; for she shall be a mother to me, lacking but t!ie name Creusa; nor does slight honour await her who bore such a son. Whatever chance attend thy deed, I sM'ear by this head whereby my father was wont to swear, what I promise to thee on thy prosperous return shall abide the same for thy mother and thy house." So he speaks weeping; and therewithal strips from his shoulder the gilded sword, fashioned with wondrous art by Lycaon of Gnosus and fitted for use with ivory sheath. To Nisus Mnestheus gives a skin, spoil of a shaggy lion: faithful Aletes exchanges his helmet. At once they advance in arms and as they go all the company of princes, young and old, escort them to the gate with vows. Likewise fair Iulus, with a man's mind and a spirit beyond his years gave many a charge to carry to his father. But the breezes scatter all and give them fruitless to the clouds!
[314] Issuing, they cross the trenches, and through the shadow of night seek that fatal camp — yet des- tined first to be the doom of many. Everywhere they see bodies stretched along the grass in drunken sleep, chariots atilt on the shore, men lying amid wheels and harness, their arms and flagons all about. First the son of Hyrtacus thus began: "Euryalus, the hand must dare; now the occasion itself invites; here lies our way. Watch thou, that no arm be raised against us from behind, and keep wide outlook. Here will I deal destruction, and by a broad path show thee the way." So speaks he, then checks his voice, and at once drives his sword at haughty Rhamnes, who, haply pillowed on high coverlets, was drawing from all his breast the breath of sleep — a king himself, and King Turnus' best-beloved augur; but not by augury could he avert his doom. Three attendants he slew at his side, as they lay carelessly amid their arms, and Remus' armour-bearer, and the charioteer, catching him at the horses' feet. Their drooping necks he severs with the sword; then lops off the head of their lord himself, and leaves the trunk spurting blood; ground and couch reek with the warm black gore. Laniyrus, too, he slays, and Lamus, and youthful Serranus, of wondrous beauty, who had played long that night, and lay with limbs vanquished by the god's abundance;  happy he, had he played on, making that game one with the night, and pursuing it to the dawn! Even so, an unfed lion, rioting through full sheepfulds, for the madness of hunger constrains him, mangles and rends the feeble Hock that are dumb with fear, and growls with blood-stained mouth. Nor less is the slaughter of Euryalus; he too, all aflame, storms madly, and falls on the vast and unnamed multitude before him, Fadus and Herbesus, Rhoetus and Abaris — unconscious these; but Rhoetus was awake and saw it all, yet in his fear crouched behind a mighty bowl. Right in his breast, as he rose close by, the foe plunged his sword its full length, and drew it back steeped in death.  Rhoetus belches forth his red life, and dying casts up wine mixed with blood; the other hotly pursues his stealthy work. And now he drew near Messapus' followers. There he saw the last fires flickering, and horses, duly tethered, crop- ping the grass; when Nisus briefly speaks thus — for he saw his comrade swept away by reckless lust of carnage: " Let us away; for the unfriendly dawn is nigh. Vengeance is sated to the full; a path is cut through the foe." Many a soldier's arms, wrought in solid silver, they leave behind — and bowls there- with, and beautiful carpets. Euryalus takes the trappings of Rhamnes and his gold-studded sword- belt, gifts that of old wealthy Caedicus sent to Remulus of Tibur, when plighting friendship far away; he when dying gave them to his grandson for his own; after his death the Rutulians captured them in war and battle. These he tears away, and fits upon his valiant breast — all in vain. Then he dons Messapus' shapely helm, with its graceful plumes. They issue forth from the camp and make for safety.
[367] Meanwhile horsemen, sent forward from the Latin city, while the rest of the force halts arrayed upon the plains, came bearing a reply to King Turnus— three hundred, all under shield, with Volcens as leader. And now they were nearing the camp and coming under the wall, when at a distance they see the two turning away by a pathway to the left; and in the ghmmering shadows of night his helm betrayed the thoughtless Euryalus, as it flashed back the light. Not unheeded was the sight. From his column shouts Volcens: " Halt, sirs! Wherefore on a journey? Who are ye in arms? Or whither are ye going? " They essay no response, but speed their flight to the wood and trust to night. On this side and that the horsemen bar the well-known crossways, and with sentinels girdle every outlet. The forest spread wide with shaggy thickets and dark ilex; dense briers filled it on every side; here and there glimmered the path through the hidden glades. Euryalus is hampered by the shadowy branches and the burden of his spoil, and fear misleads him in the line of his path. Nisus gets clear; and now, in heed- less course, he had escaped the foe to the place afterward styled Alban from Alba's name — at that time King Latinus had there his stately stalls — when he halted and looked back in vain for his lost friend. "Unhappy Euryalus, where have I left thee? Or where shall I follow, again unthreading all the tan- gled path of the treacherous wood? " Therewith he scans and retraces his footsteps, and wanders in the silent thickets. He hears the horses, hears the shouts and signals of pursuit. Nor was the interval long, when a cry reached his ears, and he sees Euryalus, whom, now betrayed by the ground and night and bewildered by the sudden turmoil, the whole band is dragging away overpowered and struggling violently in vain. What can he do? With what force, what arms dare he rescue the youth? Or shall he cast himself on his doom amid the foe, and win mid wounds a swift and glorious death? Quickly he draws back his arm with poised spear and looking up to the moon on high, thus prays: "Thou goddess, be thou present and aid our en- deavour, O Latona's daughter, glory of the stars and guardian of the groves; if ever my father Hyrtacus brought any gifts for me to thy altars, if ever I have honoured  thee with any from my own hunting, have hung offerings in thy dome, or fastened them on thy holy roof,' grant me to confound yon troop, and guide my weapons through the air." He ended, and with all his straining body flung the steel. The flying spear whistles through the shadows of night, strikes the turned back of Sulmo, then snaps, and with the broken wood pierces the midriff. Spouting a warm torrent from his breast he rolls over chill in death, and long gasps heave his sides. This way and that they gaze round. All the fiercer, lo! he is poising another weapon from the ear-tip. While they hesitate, the spear goes whizzing through Tagus' either temple, and lodged warm in the cloven brain. Volcens storms with rage, yet nowhere espies the sender of the dart, nor where to vent his rage. "Yet thou, meanwhile, with thy hot blood, shalt pay me vengeance for both," he cried, and as he spake, rushed with drawn sword on Euryalus. Then indeed, frantic with terror, Nisus shrieks aloud; no longer could he hide himself in darkness or endure such agony: ''On me — on me — here am I who did the deed — on me turn your steel, O Rutulians! Mine is all the guilt; he neither dared nor could have done aught; this heaven be witness and the all-seeing stars! He but loved his hapless friend too well." Thus was he pleading; but the sword, driven with force, has passed through the ribs and rends the snowy breast. Euryalus rolls over in death; athwart his lovely limbs runs the blood, and his drooping neck sinks on his shoulder: as when a purple flower, severed by the plough, droops in death; or as pop- pies, with weary neck, bow the head, when weighted by some chance shower. But Nisus rushes amidst them, and sole among all seeks Volcens, to Volcens alone gives heed. Round him the foe cluster, and on every side seek to hurl him back. Onward none the less he presses, whirling his lightning blade, till he plunged it full in the face of the shrieking Rutulian, and, dying, bereft his foe of life. Then, pierced through and through, he flung himself above his lifeless friend, and there at length, in the peace of death, found rest.
[446] Happy pair I If aught my verse avail, no day shall ever blot you from the memory of time, so long as the house of Aeneas shall dwell on the Capi- tol's unshaken rock, and the Father of Rome hold sovereign sway!
[450] The victorious Rutulians, masters of plunder and spoils, with tears bore lifeless Volcens to the camp. Nor in that camp was the wailing less, when Rhamnes was found drained of life, and so many chieftains slain in a single carnage, here Serranus, and here Numa. A mighty throng rushes to the dead and dying men, to the ground fresh v/ith warm slaughter and the full streams of foaming blood. In mutual converse they note the spoils, Messapus' shining helmet, and the trappings won back with much sweat.
[459] And now early Dawn, leaving the saffron bed of Tithonus, was sprinkling her fresh rays upon the earth;  now the sun streamed in, now day unveiled the world. Turnus, himself in armour clad, sum- mons his men to arms, and each leader marshals to battle his mailed lines, and whets their anger with divers tales. Nay, on uplifted spears, O piteous sight! they affix and follow with loud clamour the heads, the very heads, of Euryalus and of Nisus. On the rampart's left side — for the right is girded by the river — the hardy sons of Aeneas have set their opposing line, hold the broad trenches, and on the high towers stand sorrowing, moved withal by those uplifted heads, that, alas! they know too well, now dripping with dark gore.
[473] Meanwhile, winged Fame, flitting through the trembling town, speeds with the news and steals to the ears of Euryalus' mother. Then at once warmth left her hapless frame: the shuttle is dashed from her hands, and the thread unwound. Forth flies the unhappy dame, and with a woman's shrieks and torn tresses, makes madly for the walls and the foremost ranks — heedless she of men, heedless of peril and of darts; then fills the sky with her plaints: " Is it thus, Euryalus, that I see thee? Thou that wert the late solace of my age, couldst thou leave me alone, cruel one? Nor, when sent on such perilous errand, might thy poor mother bid thee a last farewell .'' Alas! Thou liest in a strange land, given as prey to the dogs and fowls of Latium! Nor have I, thy mother, led thee — thy corpse  — forth to burial, or closed thine eyes, or bathed thy wounds, shroud- ing thee with the robe which, in haste, night and day, I toiled at for thy sake, beguiling with the loom the sorrows of age. Whither shall I follow? or what land now holds thy mangled limbs and dismembered body? Is this all, my son, thou bringest back to me of thyself? Is it this I have followed by land and sea? Pierce me if ye have aught of feeling, on me hurl all your weapons, O Rutulians; destroy me first with your steel; or do thou, great Father of the gods, be pitiful, and with thy bolt hurl down to hell this hateful life, since in no wise else can I break life's cruel bonds! " At that wailing their spirits were shaken, and a groan of sorrow passed through all; their strength is numbed and crushed for battle; and as thus she kindles grief, Idaeus and Actor, bidden by Ilioneus and the weeping Iulus, catch her up and bear her in their arms within.
[503] But the trumpet with brazen song rang out afar its fearful call; a shout follows and the sky re-echoes. Forth the Volscians speed in even line, driving on their tortoise-shield, and intent to fill the moat and pluck down the palisade. Some seek entrance, and essay to scale the walls with ladders, where the line is thin, and light gleams through the less dense ring of men. In return, the Teucrians shower missiles of every sort, and thrust the foe down with strong poles, trained by long warfare to defend their walls. Stones too they rolled of deadly weight, if haply they might break through the shel- tered ranks; but these, beneath their compact shield, delight to brave all chances. Yet now they fail; for where a massed throng threatens, the Teucrians roll up and hurl down a mighty mass, that laid low the Rutulians far and wide and broke their coverlet of armour. Nor do the bold Rutulians care longer to contend in blind warfare, but strive with darts to clear the ramparts. Elsewhere, grim to behold, Mezentius was brandishing his Etruscan pine and hurls smoking brands; while Messapus, the seed of Neptune, tamer of horses, tears down the rampart and calls for ladders to mount the battlements.
[525] Do thou, O Calliope, thou and thy sisters, 1 pray, inspire me while I sing, what slaughter, what deaths, Turnus dealt on that day, and whom each warrior sent down to doom; and unroll with me the mighty scroll of war.
[530] A tower loomed high above, with lofty gang- ways, posted on vantage-ground, which all the Italians strove with utmost strength to storm, and with utmost force of skill to overthrow: the Tro- jans in turn made defence with stones, and hurled showers of darts through the open loopholes. First Turnus flung a blazing torch and made fast its fire in the side; this, fanned by the wind, seized the planks and lodged in the gateways it consumed. Within, troubled and terrified, men vainly seek escape from disaster. While they huddle close and fall back to the side free from ruin, lo I under the sudden weight the tower fell, and all the sky thunders with the crash. Half dead they come to the ground, the monstrous mass behind them, pierced by their own shafts, and their breasts impaled by the cruel splin- ters. Scarcely do Helenor and Lycus alone escape — Helenor in prime of youth, whom a Licymnian slave had borne secretly to the Maeonian king, and had sent to Troy in forbidden arms, lightly accoutred with naked sword and white shield, as yet unfamed. Soon as he saw himself in the midst of Turnus' thou- sands, the Latin lines standing on this side, and standing on that, like a wild beast that, hedged about by the hunters' serried ring, rages against their shafts, flings itself on the death foreseen, and with a bound springs upon the spears — even so the youth rushes to death amidst the foe, and where he sees the weapons thickest, makes his way. But Lycus, far swifter of foot, amid foes, amid arms, gains the walls and strives to clutch the coping, and reach the hands of his comrades. Him Turnus following alike with foot and spear, taunts thus in triumph: " Fool, didst thou hope to escape our hands? " Therewith he seizes him as he hangs, and tears him down with a mighty mass of wall: even as when the bearer of Jove's bolt, as he soars aloft, has swept away in his crooked talons some hare or snowy- bodied swan; or as when the wolf of Mars has snatched from the fold a lamb that its mother seeks with much bleating. On all sides a shout goes up; on they press, and with heaps of earth fill up the trenches; some toss blazing brands on to the roofs. Ilioneus lays Lucetius low with a rock, huge fragment of a mountain, as, carrying fire, he nears the gate. Liger slays Emathion, Asilas Corynaeus; the one skilled with the javelin, the other with the arrow stealing from afar. Caeneus fells Ortygius; Turnus victorious Caeneus; Turnus Itys and Clonius, Dioxippus and Promolus, and Sagaris, and Idas, as he stood on the topmost towers; Capys slays Privernus. Him Themillas' spear had first grazed lightly; he, madly casting down his shield carried his hand to the wound. So the ai-row winged its way, and pin- ning the hand to his left side, buried itself deep within, and tore with fatal wound the breathing-ways of life. The son of Arces stood in glorious arms, his scarf embroidered with needlework, and bright with Iberian blue — of noble form, whom his father Arces had sent, a youth reared in his mother's grove about the streams of Symaetluis, where stands Palicus' altar, gift-laden and gracious. But, dropping his spears, Mezentius with tight-drawn thong thrice whirled about his head the whizzing sling, with molten bullet cleft in twain the temples of his op- posing foe, and stretched him at full length in the deep sand.
[590] Then first, 'tis said, Ascanius aimed his swift shaft in war, till now wont to affright the fleeing quarry, and with his hand laid low brave Numanus, Remulus by surname, who but lately had won as bride Turnus' younger sister. He stalked before the foremost line, shouting words meet and unmeet to utter, his heart puffed up with new-won royalty, and strode forward in huge bulk, crying:
[593] "Are ye not shamed, twice captured Phrygians, again to be cooped within beleaguered ramparts, and with walls to ward ofT death .'' Lo! these are they who by the sword claim our brides for theirs! What god, what madness, has driven you to Italy? Here are no sons of Atreus, no fable-forging Ulysses! A race of hardy stock, we first bring our new-born sons to the river, and harden them with the water's cruel cold; as boys they keep vigil for the chase, and tire the forests; their sport is to rein the steed and level shafts from the bow; but, patient of toil, and inured to want, our youth tames earth with the hoe or shakes cities in battle. All our life is worn with iron's use; with spear reversed we goad our bullocks' flanks, and sluggish age weakens not our hearts' strength nor changes our vigour. On white hairs we press the helm: and we ever delight to drive in fresh booty and live on plunder. But ye are clothed in embroidered saffron and gleaming purple; sloth is your joy, your delight is to indulge the dance; your tunics have sleeves and your turbans ribbons. O ye Phrygian women, indeed! — for Phrygian men are ye not — go ye over the heights of Dindymus, where to accustomed ears the pipe utters music from double mouths! The timbrels call you, and the Berecynthian boxwood of the mother of Ida:  leave arms to men, and quit the sword."
[621] As thus he vaunts with words of ominous strain, Ascanius brooked it not, but facing him, levelled his shaft from the horse-hair string, and drawing his arms wide apart paused, first invoking Jove thus with sup- pliant vows: "Jupiter almighty, give assent to my bold emprise! My own hand shall bring thee yearly gifts in thy temple, and set before thine altar a bullock with gilded brow, snowy white, carrying his head high as his mother, that already can butt with horn and can spurn with hoof the sand." The Father heard, and from a clear space of sky thundered on the left; that instant rang the fatal bow. With awful whirr speeds forth the tight-drawn shaft, passes through the head of Remulus, and cleaves with its steel the hollow temples. "Go, mock valour with haughty words! This answer the twice captured Phrygians send back to the Rutulians." Thus only spoke Ascanius. The Teucrians second hira with cheers, shout for joy, and lift their hearts to heaven.
[638] Then it chanced that in the realm of sky long-haired Apollo, cloud-enthroned, was looking down on the Ausonian lines and town, and thus he addresses triumphant Iulus: "A blessing, child, on thy young valour! So man scales the stars, O son of gods and sire of gods to be!  Rightly shall all wars, that fate may bring, sink beneath the house of Assaracus to rest; nor can Troy contain thee." So saying, he darts from high heaven, parts the breathing gales, and seeks Ascanius. Then he changes the fashion of his features to those of aged Butes, who aforetime was armour-bearer to Dardan Anchises, and trusty watcher at his gate; thereafter the child's father made him henchman to Ascanius. On strode Apollo, in every wise like the old man, in voice and hue, in white locks and savage-sounding arms, and speaks these words to fiery Iulus: " Be it enough, son of Aeneas, that beneath thy shafts Numanus has fallen unavenged; this maiden glory great Apollo vouchsafes thee, nor grudges the weapons that match his own; for the rest, my child, refrain from war." Thus Apollo began, but while yet speaking, left the sight of men and far away from their eyes vanished into thin air. The Dardan princes knew the god, and his heavenly arms, and heard his quiver rattle as he flew. Therefore, at the behest and will of Phoebus, they check Ascanius, eager though he was for the fray, themselves fare to the figlit again, and fling their lives into gaping perils. The shout runs from tower to tower, all along the walls; they bend their eager bows and whirl their thongs. All the ground is strewn with spears; shields and hollow helms ring as they clash; the fight swells fierce; mighty as the storm that, coming from the west, beneath the rainy Kid-stars lashes the ground; thick as the hail that storm-clouds shower on the deep, when Jupiter, grim with southern gales, whirls the watery tempest, and bursts the hollow clouds in heaven.
[672] Pandarus and Bitias, sprung from Alcanor of Ida, whom the wood-nymph Iaera bore in the grove of Jupiter — youths tall as their native pines and hills — fling open the gate entrusted to them by their captain's charge, and relying on their arms, freely invite the foe to enter the walls. Themselves within, to right and left, stand before the towers, sheathed in iron, with waving plumes upon their lofty heads: even as high in air beside the flowing streams, whether on Padus' banks or by pleasant Athesis, twin oaks soar aloft, raising to heaven their unshorn heads and nodding their lofty crowns. In rush the Rutulians when they see the entrance clear. Straight- way Quercens and Aquicolus, beautiful in arms, and Tmarus, reckless at heart, and Haemon, seed of Mars, with all their columns are routed and turn to flight, or in the very gateway lay down their life. At this, wrath waxes fiercer in their battling souls, and now the Trojans rally and swarm to the spot, and venture to close hand to hand and make longer sallies.
[691] To Turnus the chief, as far away he storms and confounds his foe, comes news that the enemy, flushed with fresh slaughter, flings wide his gates. He quits the work in hand, and stirred with giant fury, rushes to the Dardan gate and the haughty brethren. And first Antiphates, for first came he, the bastard son of tall Sarpedon by a Theban mother, he slays with cast of javelin. Through the yielding air flies the Italian cornel-shaft, and lodging in the gullet, runs deep into the breast; the wound's dark chasm gives back a foaming tide, and the steel grows warm in the pierced lung. Then Meropes and Erymas, then Aphidnus his hand lays low; then Bitias falls, fire in his eyes and rage in his heart, yet not under a javelin — for not to a javelin had he given his life — but with a mighty hiss a whirled pike sped, driven like a thunderbolt. This not two bulls' hides nor the trusty corslet with double scales of gold could withstand. The giant limbs totter and fall; earth groans, and the huge shield thunders over him. So on the Euboic shore of Baiae falls at times a rocky mass, which, builded first of mighty blocks, men cast into the sea:  so as it falls, it trails havoc, and crashing into the waters finds rest in the depths; the seas are in turmoil and the black sands mount up- ward; then at the sound lofty Prochyta trembles, and Inarime's rugged bed, laid by Jove's command above Typhoeus.
[717] Hereupon Mars, the mighty in war, lent fresh strength and valour to the Latins, and in their hearts plied his eager goads, and let slip Flight and dark Terror among the Teucrians. From all sides gather the Latins, since scope for fight is given, and the god of battle seizes on their souls. Pandarus, when he sees his brother's fallen form, sees how fortune stands, and what chance sways the day, with mighty effort pushes with his broad shoulders and swings the gate round on its hinge, leaving many a comrade shut outside the walls in the cruel fray; but others he encloses with himself, welcoming them as on they rush. Madman! not to have seen the Rutulian prince bursting in amid the throng, and wantonly to have shut him within the town, like a monstrous tiger among the helpless herds. Straightway a new light flashed from Turnus' eyes and his armour rang terribly; the blood-red plumes quiver on his crest, and lightnings shoot gleaming from his shield. In sudden dismay the sons of Aeneas recognize that hateful form and those giant limbs. Then huge Pandarus springs forward, and, blazing with wrath for his brother's death, cries: " This is not Amata's bridal palace, nor is it midmost Ardea, holding Turnus within his native walls. A foeman's camp thou seest; no chance is there to escape hence." To him Turnus, smiling with untroubled mood: " Begin, if thy heart has aught of courage, and close with me: that here too an Achilles has been found shalt thou bear word to Priam." He ended; the other, striving with all his might, hurls his spear, rough with knots and unpeeled bark. The winds received it; Saturnian Juno turned aside the coming blow, and the spear lodges in the gate. " But not from this weapon, that my right arm wields amain, shalt thou escape; for not such is he who brings weapon and wound." So saying, he rises high upon his uplifted sword; the steel cleaves the brow in twain full between the temples, and with ghastly wound severs the beardless cheeks. There is a crash , earth is shaken by the vast weight; dying, he stretches on the ground his fainting limbs and brain-bespattered armour, while, lo! in equal halves his head dangles this way and that from either shoulder.
[756] The Trojans turn and scatter in hasty terror; and, if forthwith the victor had taken thought to burst the bars perforce and let in his comrades at the gates, that day had been the last for the war and the nation. But rage and the mad lust of slaughter drove him in fury on the foe in front. First he catches Phaleris, and Gyges, whom he hamstrings; then, seizing their spears, he hurls them on the backs of the flying crowd; Juno lends strength and courage. Halys he sends to join them and Phegeus, his shield transfixed; then, as, all unwitting, on the walls they rouse the fray, Alcander and Hal i us, Noemon and Prytanis. As Lynceus moves to meet him and calls on his comrades he, from the rampart on the right, with sweep of flashing sword, smites him; severed by a single close-dealt blow, his head with helmet capped lay far away. Next fell Aniycus, scourge of beasts, whom none excelled in skill of hand to anoint the dart and arm the steel with venom; and Clytius, son of Aeolus, and Cretheus, delight of the Muses–Cretheus, the Muses' comrade, whose joy was ever in song and lyre and in stringing of notes upon the chords; ever he sang of steeds and weapons, of men and battles.
[778] At last, hearing of the slaughter of their men, the Teucrian captains, Mnestheus and gallant Seres- tus, come up, and see their comrades scattered and the foe within the gates. And Mnestheus: *' Whither then, whither, do ye bend your flight? What other walls, what other battlements have ye now beyond? Shall one man, my countrymen, and he compassed on every side by your ramparts, unscathed deal such carnage throughout the city? Shall he send down to death so many of our noblest youths? Dastards! have ye no pity, no shame, for your hapless country, for your ancient gods, for great Aeneas? "
