[788] Kindled by such words, they take heart and halt in dense array. Step by step Turnus withdraws from the fight, making for the river and the part encircled by the stream. All the more fearlessly the Teucrians press on him with loud shouts and mass their ranks — as when a crowd with levelled spears beset a savage lion: but he, affrighted, yet tierce and glaring angrily, gives ground, and neither wrath nor courage lets him turn his back, nor yet, fain though he be, can he make his way through hunters and through spears. Even thus Turnus in doubt retraces his unhurried steps, his heart seething with rage. Nay, even then twice had he attacked the foe, twice he drove them in flying rout along the walls: but the whole host hastily gathers in a body from the camp, nor durst Saturnian Juno grant him strength to oppose them, for Jupiter sent Iris down through the sky from Heaven, charged with no gentle behests for his sister, should Turnus leave not the Teucrians' lofty ramparts. Therefore, neither with shield nor sword-arm can the soldier hold his own; with such a hail of darts is he overwhelmed on all sides. Round his hollow temples the helmet echoes with ceaseless clash; the solid brass gapes beneath the rain of stones; the horsehair crest is rent from the head, and the shield's boss withstands not the blows: the Trojans and Mnestheus himself, with lightning force, launch a storm of spears. Then o'er all his body flows the sweat and runs in pitchy stream, nor has he breathing space; and a sickly panting shakes his wearied limbs. Then at length, with headlong leap, he plunges in full armour into the river. Tiber with his yellow flood received him as he came, uplifted him on buoyant waters, and, washing away the carnage, returned the joyous hero to his comrades. [1] Meanwhile there is thrown open the palace of omnipotent Olympus, and the Sire of gods and King of men calls a council to his starry dwelling, whence, high-throned, he surveys all lands, the Dardan camp, and the Latin peoples. Within the double-doored hall  they take their seats, and the king begins:
[6] " Mighty sons of Heaven, wherefore is your judgment reversed, and why strive ye with hearts so discordant? I had forbidden Italy to clash in war with Troy. What feud is this, in face of my command? What terror has bidden these or those to rush to arms and provoke the sword? There shall come — hasten it not — a lawful time for battle, when fierce Carthage shall one day let loose upon the heights of Rome mighty destruction, and open upon her the Alps. Then shall it be lawful to vie in hate, then to ravage; now let be and cheerfully assent to the covenant I ordain."
[16] Thus Jupiter in brief; but not briefly golden Venus makes reply: " O Father, O eternal sovereignty of men and things — for what else can there be which we may yet entreat? — seest thou how insolent are the Rutulians, and how Turnus fares elate through the midst upon his chariot, and rushes in swollen pride along the tide of war? No longer do banned walls shelter the Teucrians; nay within the gates ana even on their rampart heights they join battle, and flood the trenches with gore. Aeneas, unwitting, is far away. Wilt thou never suffer the leaguer to be raised? Once more a foe threatens the walls of infant Troy, yea, a second host; and once more against the Trojans rises from his Aetolian Arpi a son of Tydeus. Truly, methinks, my wounds are yet to come, and I, thy offspring, delay a mortal spear. If without thy leave and despite thy deity, the Trojans have sought Italy, let them expiate their sin, nor aid thou them with succour. But if they have but followed all the oracles, given by gods above and gods below, why is any one now able to overthrow thy bidding or why to build the fates anew.'' Why should I recall the fleet burned on the strand of Eryx?  Why the king of storms, and his raging gales roused from Aeolia, or Iris wafted from the clouds? Now she even stirs the shades — this quarter of the world was yet untried — and Allecto, launched of a sudden on the upper world, raves through the midst of Italian towns. I reck naught of empire; that was my hope, while Fortune stood; let them win whom thou wouldst have win. If there is no country for thy relentless consort to bestow upon the Teucrians, by the smoking ruins of desolate Troy, I beseech thee, O Father, let me dismiss Ascanius from arms unscathed — let my grandson still live! Aeneas, indeed, may well be tossed on unknown waters, and follow Fortune, what path soever she point out: this child let me avail to shield and withdraw from the dreadful fray. Amathus is mine, mine high Paphus and Cythera, and Idalia's shrine: here, laying arms aside, let him live out his inglorious days! Bid Carthage in mighty sway crush Ausonia; from her shall come no hindrance to Tyrian towns. What has it availed to escape the plague of war, to have fled through the midst of Argive fires, to have exhausted all the perils of sea and desolate lands, while his Teucrians seek Latium and a newborn Troy? Were it not better to have settled on the last ashes of their country, and the soil where once was Troy? Restore, I pray, Xanthus and Simois to a hapless people, and let the Teucrians retrace once more the woes of Ilium 1 "
[62] Then royal Juno, spurred by fierce frenzy; "Why forcest thou me to break my deep silence and publish to the world my hidden sorrow? Did any man or god constrain Aeneas to seek war and advance as a foe upon King Latinus? ' He sought Italy at the call of Fate.' So be it — driven on by Cassandra's raving! Did I urge him to quit the camp, or entrust his life to the winds? To commit the issue of war, the charge of battlements, to a child? To tamper with Tyrrhene faith or stir up peaceful folk? What god, what pitiless power of mine drove him to his harm } Where in this is Juno, or Iris sent down from the clouds.'' Ay, 'tis shameful that Italians should gird thy infant Troy with flames, and that Turnus set foot on his native soil — Turnus, whose grandsire is Pilumnus, whose mother divine Venilia! But what that the Trojans with smoking brands assail the Latins, that they set their yoke upon the fields of others, and drive off the spoil? What that they choose whose daughters they shall wed, and drag from her lover's breast the plighted bride .''  That they proffer peace with the hand but array their ships with armour? Thou hast power to steal Aeneas from Grecian hands, and in place of a man to offer them mist and void air, and thou hast power to turn their fleet into as many nymphs:  but that we in turn have given some aid to the Rutuli, is that monstrous ? 'Aeneas unwitting is far away '; unwitting and far away let him be! ' Paphus is thine, Idalium, and high Cythera ': why meddle with savage hearts, and a city teeming with war? Is it I that essay to overthrow from the foundation Phrygia's tottering state? Is it I? Or is it he who flung the hapless Trojans in the Achaeans' path? What cause was there that Europe and Asia should uprise in arms and break bonds of peace by treachery? Was it I that led the Dardan adulterer to ravage Sparta? Was it I that gave him weapons or fostered war with lust? Then shouldst thou have feared for thine own; now too late thou risest with unjust complaints, and handiest bickering words in vain."
[96] Thus pleaded Juno, and all the celestial company murmured assent in diverse wise: even as when rising blasts, caught in the forest, murmur, and roll their dull moanings, betraying to sailors the oncoming of the gale. Then the Father Almighty, prime potentate of the world, begins: as he speaks, the high house of the gods grows silent and earth trem- bles from her base; silent is high heaven; then the Zephyrs are hushed; Ocean stills his waters into rest. 
[104] "Take therefore to heart and fix there these words of mine. Since it may not be that Ausonians and Teucrians join alliance, and your disunion admits no end, whate'er the fortune of each to-day, whate'er the hope each pursues, be he Trojan or be he Rutulian, no distinction shall I make, whether it be Italy's fate that holds the camp in leaguer, or Troy's baneful error and misleading prophecies. Nor do I free the Rutulians. Each one's own course shall bring him weal or woe. Jupiter is king over all alike; the fates shall find their way." By the waters of his Stygian brother, by the banks that seethe with pitch and black swirling waters, he nodded assent, and with the nod made all Olympus tremble. So passed the parley. Then from his golden thi-one rose Jupiter, and the celestial company gather round and escort him to the threshold.
[118] Meanwhile, about every gate the Rutulians press on, to slaughter the foe with the sword, and to gird the ramparts with flame. But the host of the Aeneadae is held pent within the palisades, and hope of escape is none. Forlorn and helpless they stand on the high towers, and girdle the walls with scanty ring. Asius, son of Imbrasus, and Thymoetes, son of Hicetaon, and the two Assaraci, and Castor, and old Thymbris are the foremost rank; at their side are Sarpedon's two brothers, Clarus and Thaemon, come from lofty Lycia. One, straining his whole frame, uplifts a giant rock, no scant frag- ment of a mount, even Acmon of Lyrnesus, huge as his father Clytius, or his brother Mnestheus. Some .with darts and some with stones, they strive to ward off the foe, and hurl fire and fit arrows to the string. In their midst, lo! the Dardan boy himself, Venus' most rightful care, his comely head uncovered, glit- ters like a jewel inset in yellow gold to adorn or neck or head, or as ivory gleams, skilfully inlaid in boxwood or Orician terebinth; his milk-white neck receives his streaming locks, clasped in circlet of pliant gold. Thee, too, Ismarus, thy high-souled clansmen saw aiming wounds and arming shafts with venom, thou noble scion of a Lydian house, where men till rich fields and Pactolus waters them with gold. There too was Mnestheus, whom yesterday's triumph of thrusting Turnus from the rampart heights exalts to the stars; and Capys, from whom comes the name of the Campanian city.
[146] Thus they had clashed in stubborn warfare's conflict: and Aeneas at midnight was cleaving the seas. For soon as, leaving Evander and entering the Tuscan camp, he meets the king, and to the king announces his name and his race, the aid he seeks, and the aid he himself offers; informs him of the forces Mezentius is gathering to his side, and the violence of Turnus' spirit; then warns him, what faith may be put in things human, and with pleas mingles entreaties — without delay Tarchon joins forces and strikes a treaty; then, freed from Fate, the Lydian people embark under heaven's ordinance, entrusting themselves to a foreign leader. Aeneas' ship leads the van with Phrygian lions beneath her beak, above them, towering Ida, sight most welcome to Trojan exiles.2 There sits great Aeneas, pondering the changing issues of war; and Pallas, clinging close to his left side, asks him now of the stars, their guide through darksome night, and now of his trials by land and sea.
[163] Now fling wide Helicon, ye goddesses, and wake your song — what host comes the while with Aeneas from the Tuscan shores, arming the ships and riding o'er the sea.
[166] At their head Massicus cleaves the waters in the bronze-plated Tiger: under him is a band of a thousand youths, who have left the walls of Clusium and the city of Cosae; their weapons arrows, light quivers on the shoulders, and deadly bows. With him is grim Abas, all his train in dazzling armour, his vessel gleaming with a gilded Apollo. To him Populonia had given six hundred of her sons, all skilled in war, but Ilva three hundred — an island rich in the Chalybes' inexhaustible mines. Third comes Asilas, famous interpreter between gods and men, whom the victims' entrails obey, and the stars of heaven, the tongues of birds and prophetic lightning fires. A thousand men he hurries to war in serried array and bristling with spears. These Pisa bids obey him — city of Alphean birth, but set in Tuscan soil. Then follows Astyr, of wondrous beauty — Astyr, relying on his steed and many-coloured arms. Three hundred more — all of one soul in following — come from the men who have their home in Caere and in the plains of Minio, in ancient Pyrgi, and fever-stricken Graviscae.
[185] Nor would I pass thee by, O Cinyras, bravest in war of Ligurian captains, or thee, Cupavo, with thy scanty train, from whose crest rise the swan-plumes — a reproach, O Love, to thee and thine  — even the badge of his father's form. For they tell that Cycnus, in grief for his loved Phaethon, while he is singing and with music solacing his woeful love amid the shade of his sisters' leafy poplars, drew over his form the soft plumage of hoary eld, leaving earth and seeking the stars with his cry. His son, following on ship-board with a band of like age, drives with oars the mighty Centaur; over the water towers the monster, and threatens to hurl a monstrous rock into the waves from above, while with long keel he furrows the deep seas.
[198] Yonder, too, Ocnus summons a host from his native shores, son of prophetic Manto and the Tuscan river, who gave thee, O Mantua, ramparts and his mother's name — Mantua, rich in ancestry, yet not all of one stock: three races are there, and under each race four peoples:  herself the head of the peoples, her strength from Tuscan blood. Hence, too, Mezentius arms five hundred against himself," whom Mincius, child of Benacus, crowned witli gray sedge, leads over the seas in their hostile ships of pine. On comes Aulestes heavily, lashing the waves as he rises to the stroke of a hundred oars; the waters foam as the surface is uptorn. He sails in the huge Triton, whose shell affrights the blue billows: its shaggy front, as it floats, shows a man down to the waist, its belly ends in a fish; beneath the monster's breast the wave gurgles in foam. So many the chosen chiefs who sailed in thrice ten ships to the succour of Troy, and cut the briny plains with brazen beak.
[215] And now day had passed from the sky and gracious Phoebe was trampling mid-heaven with her night-roving steeds; Aeneas, for care allows no rest to his limbs, sat at his post, his own hand guiding the rudder and tending the sails. And lo! in mid course a band of his own company meets him, for the nymphs whom gracious Cybele had bidden be deities of the sea, and turn from ships to nymphs, came swimming abreast and cleaving the billows, as many as the brazen prows that once lay moored to shore. They know their king from afar, and encircle him with dances. From among them, Cymodocea, who was most skilled in speech, following behind, grasps the stern with her right hand, and herself rises breast high above the Mave, while with her left hand she oars her way upon the silent waters. Then thus she accosts the prince, all unaware: " Wakest thou, Aeneas, scion of gods.-* Wake and fling loose the sheets of thy sails. We — pines of Ida, from her sacred crest, now nymphs of the sea — are thy fleet I When the traitorous Rutulian was driving us head- long with fire and sword, reluctant we broke thy bonds, and are seeking thee over the main. This new shape the Great Mother gave us in pity, and granted us to be goddesses and spend our life beneath the waves. But thy boy Ascanius is hemmed in by wall and trench, in the midst of arms and of Latins, bristling with war. Already the Arcadian horse, joined with brave Etruscans, hold the appointed place; to bar their way with interposing squadrons, lest they approach the camp, is Turnus' fixed resolve. Up, then, and with the coming dawn first bid thy friends be called to arms, and take thou the shield which the Lord of Fire himself gave thee — the shield invincible, and rimmed about with gold. To-morrow's light, if thou deem not my words idle, shall look on mighty heaps of Rutulian carnage." She ended, and at parting, with her right hand she drove the tall ship on, well knowing how; on it speeds over the wave, fleeter than javelin and wind-swift arrow. Then the rest quicken their speed. Marvelling, the Trojan son of Anchises is in amaze, yet cheers his soul with the omen. Then looking at the vault above, he briefly prays: " Gracious lady of Ida, mother of the gods, to whom Dindymus is dear, and tower-crowned cities, and lions coupled to thy rein, be thou now my leader in the fight, do thou duly prosper the omen, and attend thy Phrj'gians, O god- dess, with favouring step! " Thus much he said; and meanwhile the returning day was rushing on with fulness of light, and had chased away the night.
[258] First he commands his comrades to follow his signals, attune their hearts to combat and fit themselves for the fray. And now, as he stands on the high stern, he had his Trojans and his camp in view, when at once he lifted high in his left hand his blazing shield. The Dardans from the walls raise a shout to the sky; fresh hope kindles wrath; they shower their darts amain — even as amid black clouds Strymonian cranes give signal, while clamorously they skim the air, and flee before the south winds with joyous cries. But to the Rutulian king and the Ausonian captains these things seemed marvellous, till, looking back, they behold the shoreward- facing sterns, and the whole sea moving onward with the ships. On the hero's head blazes the helmet- peak, flame streams from the crest aloft, and the shield's golden boss spouts floods of fire — even as when in the clear night comets glow blood-red in baneful wise; or even as fiery Sirius, that bearer of drought and pestilence to feeble mortals, rises and saddens the sky with baleful light.
[276] Yet fearless Tumus lost not the firm hope, to seize the shore first, and drive the coming foe from land. " What in your prayers ye have craved, ye now may do — break through with the sword! The war-god's self is in brave men's hands!  Now let each be mindful of his wife and home; now recall the great deeds, the glories of our sires! Let us on and meet them at the water's edge, while they are confused, and their feet falter, as first they land. Fortune aids the daring." So saying, he ponders with himself whom to lead to the attack, or to whom he may entrust the beleaguered walls.
[287] Meanwhile Aeneas lands his crews from the tall ships by gangways. Many watch for the ebb of the spent sea, and boldly leap into the shallows; others use oars. Tarchon, marking the shore where the shallows heave not nor the broken billow roars, but the sea, unchecked, glides up with spreading flow, suddenly turns his prows thither and implores his men: " Now, O chosen band, bend to your stout oars! Uplift, drive on your barques; cleave with your beaks this hostile shore, and let the keel herself plough a furrow. In such resting-place I shrink not from shipwreck, so but once I win the land." When Tarchon has thus spoken, his comrades rise on to their oars, and drive their foaming ships upon the Latin fields, till the beaks gain the dry land and every hull comes to rest unscathed. But not thy ship, Tarchon; for while, dashing amid the shallows, she hangs upon an uneven ridge, long poised in doubtful balance, and wearies the waves, she breaks up and plunges her crew amid the billows. Broken oars and floating thwarts entangle them, while the ebbing wave sucks back their feet.
[308] Nor Does dull delay hold Turnus back, but swiftly he sweeps his whole army upon the Trojans, and plants it against them on the shore. The trumpets sound. First dashed Aeneas on the rustic ranks — fair omen for the fight — and laid low the Latins, slaying Theron, who in his might dared assail the hero Aeneas. Driven through the brazen joints and through tunic rough with gold, the sword drank from his pierced side. Next he strikes Lichas, who was cut from his dead mother's womb, and consecrated to thee, Phoebus, for that as a babe he was suffered to escape the peril of the steel. Hard by, he cast down to death sturdy Cisseus and giant Gyas, as they with clubs laid low the ranks: naught availed them the arms of Hercules, or their stout hands and Melampus their sire — even Alcides' comrade, while earth yielded him grievous travails. Lo! as Pharus flings forth idle words, he launches his javelin and plants it in his bawling mouth. Thou, too, hapless Cydon, while thou followest thy new delight, Clytius, whose cheeks are golden with early down — thou hadst fallen under the Dardan hand and lain, O piteous sight, forgetful of all thy youthful loves, had not thy brethren's serried band met the foe — chil- dren of Phorcus, seven in number, and seven the darts they throw. Some from helmet and shield glance idly; some, so that they but graze the body, kindly Venus turned aside. Thus Aeneas speaks to loyal Achates: " Bring me store of weapons; none shall my hand hurl at Rutulians in vain, of all that once on Ilium's plains were lodged in bodies of the Greeks." Then he seizes a great spear and hurls it; flying, it crashes through the brass of Maeon's shield, rending corslet and breast at once. To his aid runs up Alcanor, and with his right arm brother upholds falling brother; piercing the arm, the spear flies right onward, keeping its bloody course, and the dying arm hung by the sinews from the shoulder. Then Numitor, tearing the lance from his brother's body, aimed at Aeneas, yet could not also strike him full, but grazed the thigh of great Achates.
[345] Now comes up Clausus from Cures, trusting in his youthful frame, and from a distance smites Dryops under the chin with his stiff shaft driven amain, and piercing his throat robs him, even as he speaks, of voice and life together; but Dryops smites the ground with his forehead, and from his mouth vomits thick gore. Three Thracians, too, of the exalted race of Boreas, and three, whom their father Idas and their native Ismarus sent forth, he lays low in divers wise. Halaesus runs to his side, and the Auruncan bands; the scion, too, of Neptune comes up, Messapus glorious with his steeds. Now these, now those, strain to thrust back the foe; on Ausonia's very threshold is the struggle. As in wide heaven warring winds rise to battle, matched in spirit and strength; they yield not to one another — not winds, not clouds, not sea; long is the battle doubtful; all things stand locked in struggle; even so clash the ranks of Troy and the ranks of Latium, foot fast with foot, and man massed with man.
[362] But in another part, where a torrent had driven far and wide rolling boulders and bushes uptorn from the banks, soon as Pallas saw his Arcadians, unused to charge on foot, turn to flight before pursuing Latium — for the roughness of ground lured them for once to resign their steeds — then, as the one hope in such strait, now with entreaties, now with bitter words, he fires their valour: " Friends, whither flee ye? By your brave deeds I pray you, by your King Evander's name by the wars ye have won, by my hopes, now springing up to match my father's renown — trust not to flight. 'Tis the sword must hew a way through the foe. Where yonder mass of men presses thickest, there your noble country calls you back, with Pallas at your head. No gods press upon us; mortals, by mortal foes are we driven; we have as many lives, as many hands as they. Lo! ocean hems us in with mighty barrier of sea; even now earth fails our flight; shall we seek the main or Troy? " So speaking, he dashes on into the midst of the serried foe.
[380] First Lagus meets him, drawn thither by unkind fate; him, while tearing at a stone of vast weight, he pierces with hurled javelin, where the spine midway between the ribs made a parting, and plucks back the spear from its lodging in the bones. Nor does Hisbo surprise him, falling on him from above, and hopeful though he be; for Pallas, as he rushes on, reckless and enraged o'er his comrade's cruel death, has welcome ready and buries his sword in his swollen  lung. Next he assails Sthenius, and Ancheniolus of Rhoetus' ancient line, who dared defile his stepdame's bed. Ye too, twin brethren, fell on Rutulian plains, Larides and Thymber, sons of Daucus, most like in semblance, indistinguishable to kindred, and to their own parents a sweet perplexity. But a grim difference now has Pallas made between you. For thy head, Thymber, had Evander's sword swept off; while thy severed hand, Larides, seeks its master, and the dying fingers twitch and clutch again at the sword,
[397] Fired by his chiding and beholding his glorious deeds, the Arcadians are armed by mingled wrath and shame to face the foe. Then Pallas pierces Rhoeteus, as he flies past in his car. Thus much respite, thus much delay Ilus gained; for at Ilus he had launched from afar his strong spear, and Rhoeteus intercepts it midway, fleeing from thee, noble Teuthras, and from Tyres thy brother. Rolling from the car in death, he spurns with his heels the Rutulian fields. And as in summer, when the winds he longed for have risen, some shepherd kindles fires here and there among the woods; on a sudden the mid-spaces catch, and Vulcan's bristling battle-line spreads o'er the broad fields unbroken; he, from his seat, gazes down victorious on the revelling flames: even so all thy comrades' chivalry rallies to one point in aid of thee, Pallas! But Halaesus, bold in war, advances to confront them, and gathers himself behind his shield. He slays Ladon, and Pheres, and Demodocus; with gleaming sword he lops off Strymonius' hand, raised against his throat; then smites Thoas in the face with a stone, and scattered the bones, mingled with blood and brains. His sire, prophetic of fate, had hidden Halaesus in the woods: when, with advance of age, he relaxed his glazing eyes in death, the Fates laid hand on him and devoted him to Evander's darts. Him Pallas assails, first praying thus: " Grant now, father Tiber, to the steel I poise and hurl, a prosperous way through stout Halaesus' breast; thy oak shall hold these arms and the hero's spoils." The god heard the prayer; while Halaesus shielded Imaon, the luckless man offers his defenceless breast to the Arcadian lance.
[426] But Lausus, a mighty portion of the war, lets not his ranks be dismayed by the hero's vast carnage; first he cuts down Abas, who faces him, the battle's knot and barrier. Then falls the youth of Arcadia, the Etruscans fall, and ye, O Trojans, whose bodies the Greeks wasted not. The armies close, matched in captains, as in might; the rearmost crowd upon the van, and the throng suffers not weapons or hands to move. Here Pallas presses and strains; there Lausus confronts him; the two nearly matched in years, and peerless in beauty, but to th.em fortune had denied return to their fatherland. Yet the king of great Olympus suffered them not to meet face to face; ere long each has his own fate awaiting him beneath a greater foe.
[439] Meanwhile his gracious sister warns Turnus to go to Lausus' aid, and with his swift car he cleaves the ranks between. As he saw his comrades: " 'Tis time," he cries, "to stand aside from battle; I alone encounter Pallas; to me alone is Pallas due; I would that his father himself were here to see! " He said, and at his bidding his comrades withdrew from the field. But when the Rutulians retired, then the youth, marvelling at the haughty behest, stands in amaze at Turnus, rolls his eyes over that giant frame, and with fierce glance scans all from afar, then with these words meets the monarch's words: " Soon shall I win praise either for kingly spoils or for a glorious death; ray sire is equal to either lot: away with threats! " So saying, he advances into the midfield: cold gathers the blood at the hearts of the Arcadians. Down from his car leapt Turnus; on foot he makes ready to close with the other. And as when from some lofty outlook a lion has seen a bull stand afar on the plain, meditating battle, on he rushes; even such seemed the coming of Turnus. But Pallas, when he deemed his foe within range of a spear-cast, advanced the first, if haply chance would aid the venture of his ill-matched strength, and thus to great heaven he cries: " By my father's welcome, and the board whereto thou earnest a stranger, I beseech thee, Alcides, aid my high emprise! May Turnus see me strip the bloody arms from his dying limbs, and may his glazing eyes endure a conqueror!" Alcides heard the youth, and deep in his heart stifled a heavy groan, and shed idle tears. Then with kindly words the Father bespeaks his son:  "Each has his day appointed; short and irretrievable is the span of life to all: but to lengthen fame by deeds — that is valour's task. Under Troy's high walls fell those many sons of gods; yea, with them fell mine own child Sarpedon. For Turnus too his own fate calls, and he has reached the goal of his allotted years." So he speaks, and turns his eyes away from the Rutulian fields.
[474] But Pallas hurls his spear with all his strength and plucks his flashing sword from its hollow scab- bard. On flies the shaft and strikes where the top of the mail rises to guard the shoulder; then, forcing a way through the shield's rim, at last even grazed the mighty frame of Turnus.
[479] At this, Turnus, long poising his oaken shaft, tipped with sharp steel, hurls it against Pallas, speak- ing thus: "See whether our weapon be not the more piercing!" He ended; but with quivering stroke the point tears through the centre of the shield, with all its plates of iron, all its plates of brass, all the bull-hide's overlaying folds; then pierces the corslet's barrier and the mighty breast. In vain he plucks the warm dart from the wound; by one and the same road follow blood and life. Prone he falls upon the wound, his armour clashes over him, and, dying, he smites the hostile earth with blood-stained mouth. Then standing over him, Turnus cries: "Arcadians, give heed, and bear these my words back to Evander: even as he has merited, I send him back Pallas! Whatever honour a tomb gives, whatever solace a burial, I freely grant; yet his wel- come of Aeneas shall cost him dear." So saying, with his left foot he trod upon the dead, tearing away the belt's huge weight and the story of the crime thereon engraved  — the youthful band foully slain on one nuptial night, and the chambers drenched with blood — which Clonus, son of Eurytus, had richly chased in gold. Now Turnus exults in the spoil, and glories in the winning. O mind of man, knowing not fate or coming doom or how to keep bounds when uplifted with favouring fortune! To Turnus shall come the hour when for a great price will he long to have bought an unscathed Pallas, and when he will abhor those spoils and that day. But with many moans and tears his friends throng round Pallas and bear him back laid upon his shield. O the great grief and yet great glory to thy father of that home-coming of thine! This day first gave thee to war, this also takes thee hence; yet vast are the piles thou leavest of Rutulian dead!
[510] And now not mere rumour of the bitter blow, but a surer messenger, flies to Aeneas — that his men are but a hair's-breadth removed from death, that 'tis time to succour the routed Teucrians. With the sword he mows down all the nearest ranks, and fiercely drives with the steel a broad path through the host, seeking thee, Turnus, still Hushed with new-wrought slaughter. Pallas, Evander, all stands before his eyes — the board whereto he then came first, a stranger, and the right hands pledged. Then, four youths, sons of Sulmo, and as many reared by Ufens, he takes alive, to offer as victims to the dead and to sprinkle the funeral flame with captive blood. Next at Magus from afar he had aimed the hostile lance. Deftly he cowers — the lance flies quivering o'er him — and, clasping the hero's knees, he speaks thus in suppliance: " By the spirit of thy father, by thy hope in growing Iulus, I entreat thee, save this life for a son and for a sire. A stately house have I; buried deep within lie talents of chased silver, and mine are masses of gold, wrought and unwrought. Not on me turns the victory of Troy, nor will one life make difference so great." He spoke, and Aeneas thus replied: "Those many talents of silver and gold thou tellest of, spare for thy sons. Such trafficking in war Turnus first put away, even in the hour when Pallas was slain. Thus judges my father Anchises' spirit, thus Iulus." So speaking, he grasps the helmet with his left hand, and bending back the suppliant's neck, drives the sword up to the hilt. Hard by was Haemon's son, priest of Phoebus and Trivia, his temples wreathed in the fillet's sacred band, all glittering in his robe and in resplendent arms. Him he meets and drives over the plain; then, bestriding the fallen, slaughters him and wraps him in mighty darkness; his armour Serestus gathers and carries away on his shoulders, a trophy. King Gradivus, unto thee!
[543] Caeculus, born of Vulcan's race, and Umbro, who comes from the Marsian hills, repair the ranks. Against them storms the Dardan. His sword had lopped off Anxur's left arm with all the circle of the shield — he had uttered some brave vaunt and thought his hand would match his word, and per- chance lifted his soul heaven-high and promised himself hoary eld and length of years — when, in the pride of gleaming arms, Tarquitus, whom the Nymph Dryope had borne to silvan Faunus, crossed his fiery course. Drawing back his spear, he pins the corslet and the shield's huge burden together; then, as the youth vainly pleaded and is fain to say many a word, he dashes his head to the ground, and as he spurns the trunk, yet warm, above him speaks thus from pitiless heart: " Lie now there, thou terrible one! No loving mother shall lay thee in earth, nor load thy limbs with ancestral tomb. To birds of prey shalt thou be left; or, sunk beneath the flood, the wave shall bear thee on, and hungry fish shall suck thy wounds." Next he o'ertakes Antaeus and Lucas, foremost of Turnus' ranks, and brave Numa, and tawny Camers, son of noble Volcens, who was wealthiest in the land of the Ausonians, and reigned over silent Amyclae. Even as Aegaeon, who, men say, had a hundred arms and a hundred hands, and flashed fire from fifty mouths and breasts, what time against Jove's thunders he clanged with as many like shields, and bared as many swords;  so Aeneas o'er the whole plain gluts his victorious rage, when once his sword grew warm. Nay, see! he turns upon Niphaeus' four-horse car and his opposing front; and lo! when they mark his long strides and deadly rage, in terror they turn, and, rushing backward, fling forth their master and whirl the chariot to the shore.
[575] Meanwhile, with their two white steeds, there dash into the midst Lucagus and Liger his brother; but the brother guides the steeds with the reins, while Lucagus fiercely whirls his drawn sword. Their furious onset Aeneas could not brook, but rushed upon them, and towered gigantic with opposing spear. To him Liger: " Not Diomede's horses dost thou see, nor Achilles' car, nor Phrygia's plains; this hour shall upon this soil end thy warfare and thy life." Such words fly abroad from mad Liger's lips. But not in words the Trojan hero shapes reply, for he hurls his javelin against the foe. Then, as Lucagus, bending forward to the stroke, urged on his steeds with the sword, even when, with left foot advanced, he gets ready for the fray, there comes the spear through the lowest rim of his gleaming shield, then pierces the left groin; tumbling from the car, he rolls in death upon the plain, while good Aeneas bespeaks him with bitter words: " Lucagus, no coward flight of thy steeds has betrayed thy car; no vain shadow of a foe has turned them back; thyself, leaping from the wheels, forsakest thy beasts." So saying, he seized the steeds; down-gliding from the self-same car, the brother piteously outstretched his helpless hands: " By thyself, by the parents who gave life to such a son, O hero of Troy, spare this life, and have pity on my prayer! " Longer had been his plea, but Aeneas: " Not such erewhile were thy words. Die, and let not brother forsake brother! " — then with the sword he cleft open the bosom, wherein is life's lurking-place. Such were the deaths the Dardan chieftain wrought o'er the plains, raging like torrent-brook or black tempest. At last the boy Ascanius and the vainly beleaguered warriors burst forth and leave the camp.
[606] Meanwhile Jupiter opens speech with Juno: "O sister and dearest wife in one, 'tis Venus, as thou didst deem — nor errs thy judgment — that upholds the Trojan power, not their own right hands, quick for war, and their fierce souls, patient of peril." To him Juno meekly: " Why, my fairest lord, vexest thou a sick heart, that fears thy stern commands? Had my love the force that once it had, and still should have, this boon surely thou wouldst not deny me, even the power to withdraw Turnus from the fray, and preserve him in safety for his father Daunus. But now let him perish and with innocent blood make atonement to the Trojans! Yet from our lineage he derives his name, for Pilumnus was his sire four generations gone; and oft has he heaped thy threshold with many a gift from a lavish hand."
[621] To her the king of heavenly Olympus thus briefly spake: " If thy prayer be for a respite from present death, and a reprieve for the doomed youth — if thou understandest that such is my will, take Turnus away in flight, and snatch him from impending fate. Thus far is there room for indulgence. But if thought of deeper favour lurks beneath thy prayers, and thou deemest that the war's whole course may be moved or altered, thou nursest an idle hope."
[628] And Juno weeping; " What if thy heart should grant what thy tongue begrudges, and this life I crave should remain assured to Turnus? Now a heavy doom awaits him for no guilt, or I wander blind to truth. Yet, O that rather I were mocked by lying fears, and that thou, who canst, wouldst bend thy purposes to a better end! "
[633] These words said, straightway she through the air darted from high heaven, driving her storm-chariot cloud-engirdled; and sought the army of Ilium and the camp of Laurentum. Then the goddess out of hollow mist fashions a thin, strengthless phantom in the likeness of Aeneas, a monstrous marvel to behold, decks it with Dardan weapons, and counterfeits the shield and plumes on his godlike head, gives it unreal words, gives a voice without thought, and mimicks his gait as he moves; — even like shapes that flit, 'tis said, when death is past, or like dreams that mock the slumbering senses. But exultant, the phantom stalks before the foremost ranks, with weapons provokes the foe, and with cries defies him. On it rushes Turnus, and from afar hurls a hissing spear; the phantom wheels round in flight. Then indeed, when Turnus deemed that Aeneas had turned and yielded, and with bewildered soul drank in the empty hope: "Whither," he cries, "dost flee, Aeneas? Forsake not thy plighted bridal chamber; this hand shall give thee the land thou hast sought overseas." With such clamour he follows, and brandishes his naked blade, nor sees that the winds bear away his triumph!
[653] It chanced that, moored to the ledge of a lofty rock, with ladders let down and gangway ready, stood the ship, wherein king Osinius sailed from the coasts of Clusium. Hither the hurrying phantom of flying Aeneas flings himself to shelter; nor with less speed Turnus follows, surmounts all hindrances, and springs across the lofty bridge. Scarce had he touched the prow when Saturn's daughter snaps the cable and sweeps the sundered ship over the ebbing waters. But meantime Aeneas is challenging his vanished foe to battle, and sends down to death many bodies of warriors who cross his path. Then the airy phantom seeks shelter no longer, but soaring aloft blends with a dark cloud, while meantime the gale is whirling Turnus o'er mid ocean. Unknowing of the truth and unthankful for escape, he looks back and raises his voice and clasped hands to heaven: " Almighty Father! hast thou deemed me worthy of reproach so great, and is it thy will that I pay such penalty? Whither am I bound? Whence am I come? What flight bears me home, or in what guise? Shall I look again on the camp or walls of Laurentum? What of that warrior band who followed me and my standard? Whom, one and all — Oh! the shame — I have left in the jaws of a cruel death, and now I see them scattered and hear their groans as they fall. What shall I do? What earth could now gape deep enough for me? Nay, rather, O ye winds, be pitiful! On rock, on reef drive the ship — from my heart I, Turnus, implore you — and cast it on some sandbank's ruthless shoal, where neither Rutuli nor Rumour that knows my shame may follow! " So saying, he wavers in spirit this way and that, whether for disgrace so foul he should madly fling himself on his sword and drive the cruel steel through his ribs, or plunge amid the waves, and seek by swimming to gain the winding shore, and once more cast himself against the Trojan arms. Thrice he essayed either way; thrice mighty Juno stayed his hand and held him back in pity of heart. On he glides, cleaving the deep, with wave and tide to speed him, and is borne home to his father Daunus' ancient city.
[689] But meanwhile at Jove's behest fiery Mezentius takes up the battle and assails the triumphant Teucrians. The Tyrrhene ranks rush together, and press on him alone with all their hatred, on him alone with all their ceaseless darts. Even as a cliff that juts into the vast deep, exposed to the raving winds and braving the main, that endures all the stress, all the menace of sky and sea, itself fixed unshaken — so he lays low on earth Hebrus, son of Dolichaon, and with him Latagus and Palmus, swift of foot; but Latagus he smites of a sudden full in the mouth and face with a huge fragment of mountain-rock, while Palmus he hamstrings, and leaves him slowly writhing; his armour he gives Lausus to wear upon his shoulders, and his plumes to fix upon his crest. Evanthes too, the Phrygian, and Mimas, comrade of Paris and his peer in age, whom Theano bore to his sire Amycus the self-same night that Cisseus' royal daughter, pregnant with a firebrand, gave birth to Paris: Paris sleeps in the city of his fathers; Mimas, unknown rests on the Laurentine shore. And lo! even as the boar, driven by sharp-toothed hounds from mountain heights, whom pine-crowned Vesulus has sheltered for many years, or for many years the Laurentine marsh, pasturing him on tliick-growing reeds, when once he is come amid the toils, halts, snorts savagely, and bristles up his shoulders, and none have courage to rage or come near him, but all at safe distance assail him with darts and shouts —even so, of all that had righteous hatred of Mezentius, none had heart to meet him with drawn sword; from afar they provoke him with missiles and far-echoing shouts. But he, undaunted, halts, turning on every side with gnashing teeth, and shakes the javelins from his shield. 719 There had come from the ancient bounds of Corythus Acron, a Greek, leaving in exile nuptials unfulfilled. When Mezentius saw him afar, dealing havoc amid the ranks, gay in crhnson plumes and the purple of his plighted bride, even as often an unfed lion, ranging the deep coverts, for maddening hunger prompts him, if haply he has spied a timorous roe or stately-antlered stag, exults with mouth terribly agape, uprears his mane, and clings crouching over the flesh, his cruel lips bathed in foul gore — so Mezentius springs lightly upon the massed foemen. Down goes hapless Acron, hammers the black ground with his heels as he breathes his last, and dyes with blood the broken spear. And the same arm deigned not to lay low Orodes as he fled, nor to deal with cast of spear a wound unseen; full face to face he ran to meet him and opposed him as man against man, prevailing not by stealth but by strength of arms. Then, planting his foot on the fallen foe and straining at his spear, " Ho men!" he cries, "low lies great Orodes—no mean portion of the war!" His comrades join their shouts, taking up the joyous cry of triumph. But he, breatliing his last: " Not unavenged shall I be, O victor, whoe'er thou art, nor long shalt tliou exult; for thee too a like doom keeps watch, and in these same fields thou soon shalt lie." To this Mezentius, smiling amid his wrath " Now die; but let the sire of gods and king of men see to me!" So saying, he drew the weapon from the hero's body; stern repose and iron slumber press upon his eyes, and their orbs close in everlasting night.
[747] Caedicus slaughters Alcathous, Sacrator Hydaspes. Rape Parthenius, and Orses of wondrous strength; Messapus slays Clonius and Ericetes, Lycaon's son — the one, as he lay on the ground, fallen from his unbridled steed, the other as he came on foot. On foot had Lycian Agis also advanced; yet him Valerus, lacking naught of ancestral prowess, struck down; Thronius falls by Salius, and Salius by Nealces, famed for the javelin and the arrow that steals from afar.
[755] Now the heavy hand of Mars was dealing out equal woe and mutual death. Alike they slew and alike they fell — victors and vanquished, and neither these nor those knew flight. The gods in Jove's halls pit}' the vain wrath of either host, and grieve that mortals should endure such toils. Here Venus looks on, there over against her Saturnian Juno: pale Tisiphone rages amid the thousands of men. But now Mezentius, shaking his mighty spear, advances like a whirlwind on the plain. Great as Orion, when cleaving a path he stalks on foot through the vast pools of mid-ocean, towers with his shoulder above the waves, or, as he brings back an aged ash from mountain-heights, walks the ground with head hidden in the clouds: such Mezentius strode in his giant armour.
[769] On the other side Aeneas espying him in the long battle-line, moves to meet him. Undaunted he abides, awaiting his noble foe, and steadfast in his bulk; then, with eye measuring the distance that might suffice his spear: "May this right hand, my deity, and the hurtling dart I poise, now aid me! I vow thee, Lausus, thy very self, clad in spoils stripped from the robber's corpse, as my trophy of Aeneas."  He spoke, and threw from far his whistling spear; on it flies, glanced from the shield, and hard by pierces noble Antores betwixt side and flank — Antores, comrade of Hercules, who, sent from Args, had cloven to Evander, and settled in an Italian town. He falls, alas! by a wound meant for another, and gazes on the sky, and dying, dreams of his sweet Argos. Then good Aeneas casts a spear; through the hollow shield of threefold brass, through the linen folds, and inwoven work of triple bull-hides, it sped, and sank low in the groin, yet carried not home its strength. (Quickly Aeneas, gladdened by the sight of the Tuscan's blood, snatches his sword from the thigh and presses hotly on his bewildered foe. Deeply Lausus groaned for love of his dear sire, when he saw the sight, and tears rolled down his face.
[791] And here death's cruel gloom and thy most glorious deeds — if so be that ancient days may win credence for such prowess — I in sooth will not leave unsung, nay, nor thyself, O youth, so worthy to be sung!
[794] The father, disabled and encumbered, was now giving ground with retreating steps, trailing from his buckler his foeman's lance. Forth dashed the youth and plunged into the fray; and even as Aeneas' hand rose to deal the blow, he caught up the hero's point and stayed him by this check. His comrades follow with loud cries, until the father, guarded by his son's shield, might withdraw; and showering their javelins beat back the foe with missiles from afar. Aeneas, infuriate, keeps himself under shelter. And as when at times storm-clouds pour down in showers of hail, every ploughman, every husbandman flees the fields, and the wayfarer cowers in safe stronghold, be it river's bank or vault of lofty rock, while the rain falls upon the lands, that so, when the sun returns, they may pursue the day's task: even thus, o'erwhelmed by javelins on all sides, Aeneas endures the war-cloud until all its thunder is spent, chiding Lausus the while, and threatening Lausus: " Whither rushest thou to thy death, with daring beyond thy strength? Thy love betrays thee into rashness." Yet none the less the youth riots madly; and now wrath rises higher in the Dardan leader's heart, and the Fates gather up Lausus' last threads; for Aeneas drives the sword sheer through the youth's body, and buries it within to the hilt. The point pierced the targe — frail arms for one so threatening — and the tunic his mother had woven him of pliant gold; blood filled his breast, then through the air the life fled sorrowing to the Shades, and left the body. But when Anchises' son saw the look on that dying face — that face so pale in wondrous wise — heavily he groaned in pity, and stretched forth his hand, as the likeness of his own filial love rose before his soul. '' What now, unhappy boy, shall good Aeneas give thee for these thy glories .'' What guerdon worthy of such a heart? Keep for thine own the arms wherein thou didst delight; and if such a care may touch thee, thyself I give back to the spirits and ashes of thy sires. Yet, hapless one! this shall solace thee for thy sad death: 'tis by the hand of great Aeneas thou dost fall." Nay, he chides the laggard comrades and uplifts their chief from the earth, where he befouled with blood his seemly ordered locks.
[833] Meanwhile by the wave of the Tiber river, the father staunched his wounds with water, and rested his reclining frame against a tree's trunk. Hard by, his brazen helmet hangs from the boughs, and his heavy arms lie in peace ou the meadow. Chosen men stand round; he himself, sick and panting, eased his neck, while over his chest streams his flow- ing beard. Many a time he asks for Lausus, and many a time he sends messengers to recall him, and convey the charge of his grieving sire. But Lausus his weeping comrades were bearing lifeless on his armour — a mighty one and laid low by a mighty wound. The ill-boding heart knew their wail afar. His hoary hair he defiles with a shower of dust, spreads both hands to heaven, and clasps his arms about the corpse: " My son! and did .such joy of life possess me, that in my stead 1 suffered thee to meet the foeman's sword — thee, whom I begat? Am I, thy father, saved by these wounds of thine, and living by thy death.? Ah me! now at last is come to me, alas! the bitterness of death; now is my wound driven deep! Yea, and I, my son, stained thy name with guilt — I, driven in loathing from the throne and sceptre of my fathers. Long have I owed my punishment to my country and my people's hate; by any form of death should I myself have yielded up my guilty life. Now I live on, and leave not yet daylight and mankind; but leave I will." And with the word he raises himself on his stricken thigh, and though his force flags by reasim of the deep wound, yet, undismayed, he bids his horse he brought. This was his pride, this his solace; on this he passed victorious from every battle. He addresses the grieving beast and accosts it thus: " Rhoebus, long have we lived, if to mortal beings aught be long. Today thou shalt either bear off in victory yonder bloody spoils with the head of Aeneas, and avenge with me the sufferings of Lausus, or, if no force opens a way, thou shalt die witli me; for thou, gallant steed, wilt not deign, methinks, to brook a stranger's bidding and a Trojan lord! " He spoke, and, mounting the beast, settled his limbs as was his wont, and charged either hand with sharp javelins, his head glittering with brass and bristling with horse-hair plume. Thus he swiftly dashed into the midst. In that single heart surges a vast tide of shame and madness mingled with grief.
