[803] To crown the array comes Camilla, of Volscian race, leading her troop of horse, and squadrons gay with brass, — a warrior-maid, never having trained her woman's hands to Minerva's distaff or basket of wool, but hardy to bear the battle-brunt and in speed of foot to outstrip the winds. She might have flown o'er the topmost blades of unmown corn, nor in her course bruised the tender ears; or sped her way o'er mid sea, poised above the swelling wave, nor dipped her swift feet in the flood. All the youth, streaming from house and field, and thronging matrons marvel, and gaze at her as she goes; agape with wonder how the glory of royal purple drapes her smooth shoulders; how the clasp entwines her hair with gold; how her own hands bear a Lycian quiver and the pastoral myrtle tipped with steel.[1] Soon as Turnus raised up the flag of war from Laurentum's citadel and the horns rang with their hoarse notes, soon as he roused his fiery steeds and clashed his arms, straightway men's hearts were troubled; all Latium at once is leagued in startled uprising, and her sons rage madly. The chief cap- tains, Messapus and Ufens, with Mezentius, scorner of the gods, from all sides muster forces and strip the wide fields of husbandmen. Venulus too is sent to mighty Diomede's city to seek aid, and announce that Teucrians set foot in Latium; that Aeneas is come with his fleet, bringing to them his vanquished gods, and proclaiming himself a king summoned by Fate; that many tribes are joining the Dardan hero and his name spreads far and wide in Latium. What end he compasses with these beginnings, what outcome of the feud he craves, should Fortune attend him, would be more clearly seen by Diomede's self than by King Turnus or King Latinus.
[18] Thus it was throughout Latium. And the hero of Laomedon's line, seeing it all, tosses on a mighty sea of troubles; and now hither, now thither he swiftly throws his mind, casting it in diverse ways, and turning it to every shift;  as when in brazen bowls a flickering light from water, flung back by the sun or the moon's glittering form flits far and wide o'er all things, and now mounts high and smites the fretted ceiling of the roof aloft.
[26] It was night, and over all lands deep sleep held wearied creatures, birds and beasts alike, when father Aeneas, his heart troubled by woeful war, stretched him on the bank under the sky's chill cope, and let late sleep steal over his limbs. Before him the very god of the place, Tiberinus of the pleasant stream, seemed to raise his aged head amid the poplar leaves; thin lawn draped him in mantle of grey, and shady reeds crowned his hair. Then thus he spake to him. and with these words took away his cares:
[26] "O seed of a race divine, thou who from foemen's hands bringest back to us our Trojan city, and preservest her towers for ever, thou long looked for on Laurenline ground and Latin fields, here thy home is sure — draw not back — and sure are thy gods! Nor be scared by threats of war; all the swelling wrath of Heaven has abated. Even now, lest thou deem these words the idle feigning of sleep, thou shalt find a huge sow lying under the oaks on the shore, just delivered of a litter of thirty young, the mother reclining on the ground white — white, too, the young about her teals. By this token in thirty revolving years shall Ascanius found a city. Alba of glorious name. Not doubtful is my prophecy. Now on what wise thou mayest make thy triumphant way through this present ill, in few words — pay thou heed — I will explain. On these coasts Arcadians, a race sprung from Pallas, who were the company of King Evander and followed his banner, have chosen a site and set their city on the hills, from their forefather Pallas called Pallanteum. These wage war ceaselessly with the Latin race; these do thou take to thy camp as allies, and join with them in league. I myself will guide thee along the banks straight up the stream, that so, impelled by thy oars, thou majest o'ercome the opposing current. Up, arise, goddess-born, and, as the stars first set, duly offer prayers to Juno, and with suppliant vows vanquish her wrath and her threats. To me thou shalt pay thy tribute when victorious. I am he whom thou seest laving my banks with full flood and cleaving the rich tilth,the blue Tiber, river best beloved of Heaven. Here is my stately home; from lofty cities flows my fountain-head. "
[66] So spake the River, then plunged into his deep pool, seeking the lowest parts; night and sleep left Aeneas. He arises, and gazing on the eastern beams of the celestial sun, in due form uplifts water from the stream in his hollow palms, and pours forth to Heaven this prayer: " Ye Nymphs, Laurentine Nymphs, from v.hom rivers have their being, and thou, O father Tiber, thou and thy hallowed stream — receive Aeneas, and at last shield him from perils. In whatsoever springs thy pools contain thee, who pitiest our travails, from whatsoever soil thou flowest forth in all thy beauty, ever with my offerings, ever with my gifts, shalt thou be graced, thou horned stream, lord of Hesperian waters. Only be thou with me, and more surely confirm thy will! " So he speaks, and choosing two galleys from his fleet mans them with crews, and withal equips his comrades with arms.
[81] But lo! a portent sudden and wondrous to see ' Gleaming white amid the wood, of one colour with her milk-white brood, lay outstretched on the green bank before their eyes — a sow: her good Aeneas offers in sacrifice to thee, even thee, most mighty Juno, and sets with her young before thine altar. All that night long Tiber calmed his swelling flood, and flowing back with silent wave stood so still that like a gentle pool or quiet mere he smoothed his watery plain, that the oars might know no struggle. Therefore with cheering cries they speed the voyage begun: over the waters glides the well-pitched pine; in wonder the waves, in wonder the unwonted woods view the far gleaming shields of warriors and the painted hulls floating on the stream. They with their rowing give night and day no rest, pass the long bends, are shaded with diverse trees, and cleave the green woods on the peaceful water. The fiery sun had scaled the mid arch of heaven, when afar they see walls and a citadel, and scattered house- roofs, which to day Rome's empire has exalted to heaven, but then Evander ruled, a scant domain. Quickly they turn the prows to land, and draw near the town.
[102] It chanced that on that day the Arcadian king paid wonted homage to Amphitryon's mighty son -' and the gods in a grove before the city. With him his son Pallas, with him all the foremost of his people and his humble senate were offering incense, and the warm blood smoked at the altars. Soon as they saw the high ships, saw them gliding up between the shady woods and plying noiseless oars, they are affrighted by the sudden sight, and all rise up, quitting the feast. But Pallas, undaunted, for- bids them to break off the rites, and seizing his spear, flies himself to meet the strangers, and from a mound afar cries: " Warriors, what cause has driven you to try unknown paths? Whither fare ye? Of what race are ye? From what home? Is it peace or war ye bring hither?" Then father Aeneas speaks thus from the high stern, outstretch- ing in his hand a branch of peaceful olive: " Men born of Troy thou seest, and arms hostile to Latins— men whom they have driven to flight by insolent warfare. We seek Evander: bear ve this message, and say that chosen captains of Dardania are come, suing for alliance in arms." Smitten with amaze was Pallas at that mighty name. " Come forth," he cries, " whoe'er thou art; speak to my father face to face, and pass, a guest, beneath our roof! " And with a grasp of welcome he caught and clung to his hand. Advancing, they enter the grove and leave the river.
[126] Then with friendly words Aeneas addresses the king: " Noblest of the sons of Greece, to whom Fortune has willed that I make my prayer, and off"er boughs decked with fillets, I feared not because thou wert a Danaan chief, an Arcadian and linked by blood with the twin sons of Atreus;Jjut my own worth and Heaven's holy oracles, our ancestral kin- ship, and thy fame spread through the world, have bound me to thee, and brought me Fate's willing follower. Dardanus, first father and founder ol Ilium's city, born (as Greeks relate) of Atlantean Electra, came to the Teucrians; Electra was begotten of mightiest Atlas, who on his shoulders sustains the heavenly spheres. Your sire is Mercury, whom fair Maia conceived and bore on Cyllene's cold peak; but Maia, if we have any trust in tales we have heard, is child of Atlas, the same Atlas who uplifts the starry heavens; so the lineage of the twain branches from one blood. Relying on this, no embassy did I plan, no crafty overtures to thee; myself I have brought, — myself and my own life — and am come a suppliant to thy doors. The same Daunian race pursues us, as thee, in cruel war; if they drive us forth, they deem that naught will stay them from laying all Hesperia utterly beneath their yoke, and from hold- ing the seas that wash her above and below.  Take and return friendship; we have hearts valiant in war, high souls and manhood tried in action."
[152] Aeneas ceased. As he spake, Evander had long scanned his face, and eyes, and all his form; then thus briefly replies: " Bravest of the Teucrians, how gladly do I receive and recognize thee! How I recall thy father's words, and the voice and features of great Anchises! For I remember how Priam, Laomedon's son, when on his way to Salamis he came to see the realm of his sister Hesione, passed on to visit Arcadia's cold borders. In those days early youth clothed my cheeks with bloom, and I wondered at the chiefs of Troy, wondered at their prince, Laomedon's son; but towering above all moved Anchises. My heart burned with youthful ardour to accost him and clasp hand in hand; I drew near, and led him eagerly to Pheneus' city. Departing, he gave me a glorious quiver with Lycian shafts, a scarf inwoven with gold, and a pair of golden bits that now my Pallas possesses. There- fore, the hand ye seek lo! I join with you in league, and when first to-morrow's dawn revisits earth, I will send jou hence cheered by an escort, and will aid you with our stores. Meanwhile, since ye are come hither as friends, this yearly festival, which we may not defer, graciously solemnize with us, and even now become familiar with your comrades' board."
[175] This said, he orders the repast and cups, already removed, to be replaced, and with his own hand ranges the guests on the grassy seat, and chief in honour he welcomes Aeneas to the cushion of a shaggy lion's hide, and invites him to a maple throne. Then chosen youths, and the priest of the altar, in emulous haste bring roast flesh of bulls, })ile on baskets the gifts of Ceres, fashioned well, and serve the wine of Bacchus. Aeneas and, with him, the warriors of Troy feast on the long chine of an ox and the sacrificial meat.
[184] When hunger was banished and the desire of food stayed. King Evander spoke: " These solemn rites, this wonted feast, this altar of a mighty Presence, — 'tis no idle superstition, knowing not the gods of old, that has laid them on us. As saved from cruel perils, O Trojan guest, do we pay the rites, and repeat the worship due. Now first look at this rocky overhanging cliff, how the masses are scattered afar, how the mountain-dwelling stands desolate, and the crags have toppled down in mighty ruin! Here was once a cave, receding to unfathomed depth, never visited by the sun's ras, where dwelt the awful shape of half-human Cacus; and ever the ground reeked with fresh blood, and, nailed to its proud doors, faces of men hung pallid in ghastly decay. This monster's sire was Vulcan; his were the black fires he belched forth, as he moved in mighty bulk. For us, too, time at last brought to our desire a god's advent and aid. For there came the mightiest of avengers, even Alcides, glorying in the slaughter and spoils of triple Geryon, and this way drove his huge bulls in triumph, and his oxen filled vale and riverside. But Cacus, his wits wild with frenzy, that naught of crime or craft might prove to be left undared or unessayed, drove from their stalls four bulls of surpassing form, and as many heifers of peerless beauty. And these, that there might be no tracks pointing forward he dragged by the tail into his cavern, and, with the signs of their course thus turned backwards, lie hid them in the rocky darkness: whoso sought them could find no marks leading to the cave. Meanwhile, when Amphitryon's son was now moving the well-fed herds from their stalls, and making ready to set out, the oxen at parting lowed; all the grove they fill with their plaint, and with clamour quit the hills. One heifer returned the cry, lowed from the drear cavern's depths, and from her prison baffled the hopes of Cacus. Hereupon the wrath of Alcides furiously blazed forth with black gall; seizing in hand his weapons and heavily knotted club, he seeks with speed the crest of the soaring mount. Then first our folk saw Cacus afraid and with trouble in his eyes; in a twinkling he flees swifter than the East wind and seeks his cavern; fear lends wings to his feet.
[225] Soon as he shut himself in, and, bursting the chains, dropped the giant rock suspended in iron by his father's craft, which with its barrier blocked the firm-stayed entrance, lo! the Tirynthian came in a frenzy of wrath, and, scanning every approach, turned his face this way and that, gnashing his teeth. Thrice, hot with rage, he traverses the whole Aven- tine Mount; thrice he essays the stony portals in vain; thrice he sinks down wearied in the valley. There stood a pointed rock of flint, cut sheer away all around, rising above the cavern's ridge, and exceeding high to view, fit home for the nestlings of foul birds. This, as it leaned sloping with its ridge to the river on the left, he shook, straining against it from the right, and, wrenching it from its lowest roots, tore it loose; then of a sudden thrust it forth: with that thrust the mighty heaven thunders, the banks leap apart, and the affrighted river recoils. But the den of Cacus and his huge palace stood revealed, and, deep below, the darkling cave lay open: even as though beneath some force, the earth, gaping open deep below, should unlock the infernal abodes and disclose the pallid realms abhorred of the gods, and from above the vast abyss be descried, and the ghosts tremble at the inrushing light. On him, then, caught of a sudden by unlooked for day, pent in the hollow rock and bellowing uncouth roars, Alcides hurls missiles from above, calling all weapons to his aid, and rains upon him boughs and giant mill- stones. He, the while, for now no other escape from peril was left, belches from his throat dense smoke, wondrous to tell! and veils the dwelling in blinding gloom, blotting all view from the eyes, and rolling up in the cave's depth smoke-laden night, its blackness mingled with flame. In his fury Alcides brooked not this: headlong he dashed through the flame, where the smoke rolls its wave thickest, and through the mighty cave the mist surges black. Here as Cacus in the darkness vomits vain fires, he seizes him in knot-like embrace, and, close entwined, throttles him till the eyes burst forth and the throat is drained of blood. Straightway the doors are torn off, and the dark den laid bare; the stolen oxen and forsworn plunder are shown to heaven, and the shapeless carcase is dragged forth by the feet. Men cannot sate their hearts with gazing on the terrible eyes, the face, and shaggy bristling chest of the brutish creature, and the quenched fires of his throat. From that time has this service been solemnized, and joyous posterity has kept the day — Potitius foremost, founder of the rite, and the Pinarian house, custodian of the worship of Hercules. He himself set in the grove this altar, which shall ever by us be called Mightiest, and mightiest shall it ever be. Come then, warriors, and, in honour of deeds so glorious, wreath your hair with leaves, and stretch forth the cup in your hands; call on our common god, and of good will pour ye the wine." He ceased; and thereon the twy-coloured poplar veiled his hair with the shade dear to Hercules, hanging down with festoon of leaves, and the sacred goblet charged his hand. Speedily all pour glad libation on the board, and offer prayer to the gods.
[280] Meanwhile, evening draws nearer down heaven's slope, and now the priests went forth, Potitius at their head, girt with skins after their fashion, and bearing torches. They renew the banquet and bring the welcome offerings of a second repast, and heap the altars with laden platters. Then the Salii come to sing round the kindled altars, their brows bound with poplar boughs — one band of youths, the other of old men — and these in song extol the glories and deeds of Hercules: how first he strangled in his grip the twin serpents, the monsters of his stepmother; how likewise in war he dashed down peerless cities, Troy and Oechalia; how under King Eurystheus he bore a thousand grievous toils by the doom of cruel Juno. " Thou, unconquered one, thou with thy hand art slayer of the cloud born creatures of double shape, Hylaeus and Pholus, the monsters of Crete, and the huge lion beneath Nemea's rock. Before thee the Stygian lakes trembled; before thee, the warder of Hell, as he lay on half-gnawn bones in his bloody cave; no shape daunted thee, no, not Typhoeus' self, towering aloft in arms; wit failed thee not when Lerna's snake encompassed thee with its swarm of heads. Hail, true seed of Jove, to the gods an added glory! graciously with favouring foot visit us and thy rites!" Such are their hymns of praise; and they crown all with the tale of Cacus' cavern, and the fire-breathing monster's self. All the woodland rings with the clamour, and the hills re-echo.
[306] Then, the sacred rites discharged, all return to the city. There walked the king, beset with years, and as he moved along kept Aeneas and his son at his side as companions, relieving the way with varied talk. Aeneas marvels as he turns his ready eyes all around, is charmed with the scene, and joy- fully seeks and learns, one by one, the records of the men of yore. Then King Evander, founder of Rome's citadel: " In these woodlands the native Fauns and Nymphs once dwelt, and a race of men sprung from trunks of trees and hardy oak, who had no rule nor art of life, and knew not how to yoke the ox or to lay up stores, or to husband their gains; but tree-branches nurtured them and the huntsman's savage fare. First from heavenly Olympus came Saturn, fleeing from the weapons of Jove and exiled from his lost realm. He gathered together the unruly race, scattered over mountain heights, and gave them laws, and chose that the land be called Latium, since in these borders he had found a safe hiding-place. Under his reign were the golden ages men tell of: in such perfect peace he ruled the nations; till little by little there crept in a race of worse sort and duller hue, the frenzy of war, and the passion for gain. Then came the Ausonian host and the Sicanian tribes, and ofttimes the land of Saturn laid aside her name.''' Then kings arose, and fierce Thybris with giant bulk, from whose name we of Italy have since called our river Tiber; lier true name ancient Albula has lost. Myself, from fatherland an outcast and seeking the ends of the sea, almighty Fortune and inevitable Fate planted on this soil; and the dread warnings of my mother, the nymph Carmentis, and Apollo's divine warrant, drove me hither."
[337] Scarce had he finished, when, advancing, he points out the altar and the Carmental Gate, as the Romans call it, tribute of old to the Nympli Car- mentis, soothtelling prophetess, who first foretold the greatness of Aeneas' sons, and the glory of Pallan- teum. Next he shows him a vast grove, where valiant Romulus restored an Asylum, and, beneath a chill rock, the Lupercal, bearing after Arcadian wont the name of Lycaean Pan. He shows withal the wood of holy Argiletum, and calls the place to witness, and tells of the death of Argus his guest. Hence he leads him to the Tarpeian house, and the Capitol — golden now, once bristling with woodland thickets. Even then the dread sanctity of the region awed the trembling rustics; even then they shuddered at the forest and the rock. " This grove," he cries, " this hill with its leafy crown, — though we know not what god it is — is yet a god's home: my Arcadians believe they have looked on Jove himself, while oft his right hand shook the darkening aegis and summoned the storm-clouds. Moreover, in these two towns, with wails o'erthrown, thou seest the relics and memorials of men of old. This fort father Janus built, that Saturn; Janiculum was this called, that Saturnia."
[359] So talking, each with each, they drew nigh the house of the poor Evander, and saw cattle all about, lowing in the Roman Forum and the brilliant Carinae. When they reached his dwelling: "These portals," he cries, " victorious Alcides stooped to enter; this mansion welcomed him. Dare, my guest, to scorn riches; fashion thyself also to be worthy of deity, and come not disdainful of our poverty." He said, and beneath the roof of his lowly dwelling led great Aeneas, and laid him on a couch of strewn leaves and the skin of a Libyan bear. Night rushes down, and clasps the earth with dusky wings.
[370] But Venus, her mother's heart dismayed by no idle fear, moved by the threats and stern uprising of the Laurentes, addresses Vulcan, and in her golden nuptial chamber thus begins, breathing into her words divine love; " While Argive kings were ravaging in war Troy's doomed towers, and her ramparts fated to fall by hostile flames, no aid for the sufferers did I ask, no weapons of thine art and power; no, dearest consort, I would not task thee or thy toils for naught, heavy as was my debt to Priam's sons, and many the tears I shed for Aeneas' sore distress. Now, by Jove's commands, he has set foot in the Rutulian borders; therefore, I, who ne'er asked before, come a suppliant, and ask arms of the deity I revere, a mother for her son. Thee the daughter of Nereus, thee the spouse of Tithonus, could sway with tears. Lo! what nations are mustering, what cities with closed gates whet the sword against me and the lives of my people! "
[387] The goddess ceased, and, as he falters, throws her snowy arms round about him and fondles him in soft embrace. At once he caught the wonted flame; the familiar warmth passed into his marrow and ran through his melting frame: even as when at times, bursting amid the thunder's peal, a sparkling streak of fire courses through the storm-clouds with dazzling light. His consort knew it, rejoicing in her wiles, and conscious of her beauty. Then spoke her lord, enchained by immortal love: " Why seekest so far for pleas? Whither, goddess, has fled thy faith in me .'' Had like care been th.ine, in those days too it had been right for me to arm the Trojans; nor was the almighty Father nor Fate unwilling that Troy stand or Priam live for ten years more. And now, if war is thy purpose, and this is thy intent, whatever care I can promise in my craft, whatever can be achieved with iron or molten electrum, whatever fire and air may avail — cease with entreaty to mistrust thy powers!" Thus speaking, he gave the desired embrace, and, sinking on the bosom of his spouse, wooed calm slumber in every limb.
[407] Then, so soon as repose had banished sleep, in the mid career of now waning night, what time a housewife, whose task it is to eke out life with her distaff and Minerva's humble toil, awakes the embers and slumbering fire, adding night to her day's work, and keeps her handmaids toiling by lamplight at the long task, that she may jireserve chaste her husband's bed, and rear her little sons: even so, and not more slothful at that hour, the Lord of Fire rises from his soft couch to the work of his smithy.
[416] Hard by the Sicanian coast and Aeolian Lipare rises an island, steep with smoking rocks. Beneath it thunders a cave, and the vaults of Aetna, scooped out by Cyclopean forges; strong strokes are heard echoing groans from the anvils, masses of Chalyb steel hiss in the caverns, and the fire pants in the furnace— the home of Vulcan and the land Vulcan's by name. Hither in that hour the Lord of Fire came down from high heaven.
[424] In the vast cave the Cyclopes were forging iron — Brontes and Steropes and Pyracmon with bared limbs. They had a thunderbolt, which their hands had shaped, such as full many the Father hurls down from all heaven upon earth, part already polished, while part remained unfinished. Three rays of twisted hail had they added to it, three of watery cloud, three of ruddy flame and the winged southern wind; now they were blending with the work frightful flashes, sound, and fear, and wrath with pursuing flames. Elsewhere they were hurrying on for Mars a chariot and flying wheels, wherewith he stirs up men and cities; and eagerly with golden scales of serpents were burnishing the awful aegis, armour of wrathful Pallas, the interwoven snakes, and the Gorgon's self on the breast of the goddess, with neck severed and eyes revolving. " Away with all! " he cries; " take hence your tasks begun, Cyclopes of Aetna, and hither turn your thoughts! Arms for a brave warrior must ye make. Now is need of strength, now of swift hands, now of all your masterful skill. Fling off delay! " No more he said; but they with speed all bent to the toil, allotting the labour equally. Brass and golden ore flow in streams, and wounding steel is molten in the vast furnace. A giant shield they shape, to confront alone all the weapons of the Latins, and weld it sevenfold, circle on circle. Some with panting bellows make the blasts come and go, others dip the hissing brass in the lake, while the cavern groans under the anvils laid upon it. They with mighty force, now one, now another, raise their arms in measured cadence, and turn the metal with gripping tongs.
[454] While on the Aeolian shores the lord of Lemnos speeds on this work, the kindly light and the morn- ing songs of birds beneath the eaves roused Evander from his humble home. The old man rises, clothes his limbs in a tunic, and wraps his feet in Tyrrhenian sandals. Then to his side and shoulders he buckles his Tegean sword, twisting back the panther's hide that drooped from the left. Moreover, two guardian dogs go before from the lofty threshold, and attend their master's steps. To the lodging and seclusion of his guest, Aeneas, the hero made his way, mindful of his words and the service promised. Nor less early was Aeneas astir. With the one walked his son Pallas; with the other, Achates. As they meet, they clasp hands, sit them down in the midst of the mansion, and at last enjoy free converse. The king thus begins:
[470] "Mightiest captain of the Teucrians, — for, while thou livest, never will I own the power or realm of Troy vanquished — our strength to aid in war is scant for such a name. On this side we are hemmed in by the Tuscan river; on that the Rutulian presses hard, and thunders in arms about our wall. Yet I purpose to link with thee mighty peoples and a camp rich in kingdoms, — the salvation that unforeseen chance reveals. 'Tis at the call of Fate thou comest hither. Not far hence, builded of ancient stone, lies the peopled city of Agylla, where of old the war-famed Lydian race settled on the Etruscan heights. For many years it prospered, till King Mezentius ruled it with arrogant sway and cruel arms. Why recount the despot's heinous murders } Why his savage deeds? God keep the like for himself and for his breed! Nay, he would even link dead bodies with the living, fitting hand to hand and face to face (grim torture !) and, in the oozy slime and poison of that dread embrace, thus slay them by a lingering death. But at last, outworn, his citizens in arms besiege the monstrous madman, himself and his palace, cut down his followers, and hurl fire on his roof. He, amid the carnage, flees for refuge to Rutulian soil, and finds shelter among the weapons of Turnus his friend. So all Etruria has risen in righteous fury; with instant war they demand the king for punishment. Of these thousands, Aeneas, I will make thee chief; for their ships throng all the shore clamouring, and they bid the standards advance, but the aged soothsayer restrains them with prophecy of fate: ' O chosen warriors of Maeonia, flower and chivalry of an olden race, — ye, whom just resentment launches against the foe, and Mezentius inflames with righteous wrath, no man of Italy may sway a race so proud: choose ye stranger leaders! ' At that the Etruscan lines settled down on yonder plain, awed by Heaven's warning; Tarchon himself has sent me envoys with the royal crown and sceptre, and offers the ensigns of power, bidding me join the camp and mount the Tyrrhene throne. But the frost of sluggish eld, outworn with years, and strength too sere for deeds of valour, begrudge me the command. My son would I urge thereto, were it not that, of mingled blood by Sabine mother, he drew from her a share in his fatherland. Thou, to whose years and race Fate is kind, whom Heaven calls, take up thy task, most valiant leader of Trojans and Italians both. Nay more, I will join with thee Pallas here, our hope and comfort; under thy guidance let him learn to endure warfare and the stern work of battle; let him behold thy deeds, and revere thee from his early years. To him will I give two hundred Arcadian horse, choice flower of our manhood, and in his own name Pallas will give thee as many more."
[520] Scarce had he ended; and Aeneas son of Anchises and faithful Achates, holding their eyes downcast, would long have mused on many a peril in their own sad hearts, had not Cythera's queen granted a sign from the cloudless sky. For unforeseen, comes quivering from heaven a flash with thunder, and all seemed in a moment to reel, while the Tyrihenian trumpet-blast pealed through the sky. They glance up; again and yet again crashed the mighty roar. In the serene expanse of heaven they see arms, amid the clouds, gleaming red in the clear air, and clashing in thunder. The rest stood aghast; but the Trojan hero knew the sound and the promise of his goddess mother. Then he cries: " Ask not, my friend, ask not, I pray, what fortune the portents bode; 'tis I who am summoned of Heaven. This sign the goddess who bore me foretold she would send, if war was at hand, and to my succour would bring through the air arms wrought by Vulcan. Alas, what carnage awaits the hapless Laurentines! What a price, Turnus, shalt th.ou pay me! How many shields and helms and bodies of the brave, shalt thou, O father Tiber, sweep beneath thy waves! Let them call for battle and break their covenants !"
[541] These words said, he rose from his lofty throne, and first quickens the slumbering altars with fire to Hercules, and gladly draws nigh the Lar of yesterday and the lowly household gods. Alike Evander, and alike the warriors of Troy, offer up ewes duly chosen. Next he fares to the ships and revisits his men, of whose number he chooses the foremost in valour to attend him to war; the rest glide down the stream and idly float with the favouring current, to bear news to Ascanius of his father and his fortunes. Horses are given to the Teucrians who seek the Tyrrhene fields; for Aeneas they lead forth a chosen steed, all caparisoned in a tawny lion's skin, glittering with claws of gold.
[554] Suddenly, spreading through the little town, flies a rumour, that horsemen are speeding to the shores of the Tyrrhene king. In alarm mothers redouble their vows; more close on peril treads fear, and the image of the War-god now looms larger. Then Evander, clasping the hand of his departing son, clings to him insatiate in tears and thus speaks: "O if Jupiter would bring me back the years that are sped, and make me what I was when under Praeneste's very walls I struck down the foremost ranks, burned the up-piled shields, victorious, and with this right hand sent down to Tartarus King Erulus, whom at his birth his mother Feronia had given (awful to tell !) three lives with threefold armour to wear — thrice had he to be laid low in death; yet on that day this hand bereft him of all his lives and as often stripped him of his armour — then never should I now be torn, my son, from thy sweet embrace. Never on this his neighbour's head would Mezentius have heaped scorn, dealt with the sword so many cruel deaths, nor widowed the city of so many of her sons! But ye, O powers above, and thou, O Jupiter, mighty ruler of the gods, pity, I pray, the Arcadian king, and hear a father's prayer. If your will, if destiny keep my Pallas safe, if I live still to see him, still to meet him, for life I pray; any toil soever have I patience to endure. But if, O Fortune, thou threatenest some dread mischance, now, oh, now may I break the thread of cruel life, — while fears are doubtful, while hope reads not the future, while thou, beloved boy, my late and lone delight, art held in my embrace; and may no heavier tidings wound mine ear! " These words the father poured forth at their last parting; his servants bore him swooning within the palace.
[585] And now the horsemen had issued from the open gates, Aeneas at their head with loyal Achates, then other princes of Troy; Pallas himself at the column's centre, conspicuous in scarf and blazoned armour — even as the Morning Star, whom Venus loves above all the stellar fires, when, bathed in Ocean's wave, he uplifts in heaven his sacred head and melts the darkness. On the walls mothers stand trembling, and follow with their eyes the dusty cloud and the squadrons gleaming with brass. They through the brushwood, where the journey's goal is nearest, fare in their armour; a shout mounts up, they form in column, and with galloping tramp the horse-hoof shakes the crumbling plain.
[597] Near Caere's cold stream there stands a vast grove, widely revered with ancestral awe; on all sides curving hills enclose it, and girdle the woodland with dark fir-trees. Rumour tells that the old Pelasgians who first, in time gone by, held the Latin borders, dedicated both grove and festal day to Silvanus, god of fields and flock. Not far from thence Tarchon and the Tyrrhenians camped in a sheltered spot, and now from a high hill all the host could be seen, their tents pitched in the wide fields. Hither come father Aeneas and the warriors chosen for battle, and refresh their steeds and wearied frames.
[608] But Venus, lovely goddess, drew nigh, bearing her gifts amid the clouds of heaven; and when afar she saw her son apart in a secluded vale by the cool stream, she thus addressed liim, of free will presenting herself to view; " Lo! the presents perfected by my lord's promised skill! so that thou mayest not shrink, my child, from challenging anon the haughty Lauren- tines or brave Turnus to battle." Cytherea spake, and sought her son's embrace, and set up the arms all radiant under an oak before him. He, rejoicing in the divine gift and in honour thus signal, cannot be sated, as he rolls his eyes from piece to piece, admiring and turning over in his hands and arms the helmet, terrific with plumes and spouting llames, the death-dealing sword, the stiff brazen corslet, blood-red and huge, — even as when a dark-blue cloud kindles with the sun's rays and gleams afar; then the smooth greaves of electrum and refined gold, the spear, and the shield's ineffable fabric.
[626] There the story of Italy and the triumphs of Rome had the Lord of Fire fashioned, not unversed in prophecy, or unknowing of the age to come; there, every generation of the stock to spring from Ascanius, and the wars they fought one by one. Ha had fashioned, too, the mother-wolf outstretched in the green cave of Mars; around her teats the twin boys hung playing, and mouthed their dam without fear; she, with shapely neck bent back, fondled them by turns, and moulded their limbs with her tongue. Not far from this he had set Rome and the Sabines, lawlessly carried off, what time the great Cir- cus-games were held, from the theatre's seated throng; then the sudden uprising of a fresh war between the sons of Romulus and aged Tatius and his stern Cures. Next, the self-same kings, their strife laid at rest, stood armed before Jove's altar, cup in hand, and each with each made covenant o'er sacrifice of swine. Not far thence, four-horse cars, driven apart, had torn Mettus asunder (but thou, O Alban, shouldst have stood by thy words !), and Tulhis dragged through the woods the liar's limbs, and the brambles drip[>ed with dew of blood. There, too, was Porsenna, bidding them admit the banished Tarquin, and hemming the city with migiity siege: the sons of Aeneas rushed on the sword for freedom's sake. Him thou mightest have seen like one in wrath, like one who threats, for that Codes dared to tear down the bridge, and Cloelia broke her bonds and swam the river.
[652] At the top, Manlius, warder of the Tarpeian fort, stood before the temple, and held the lofty Capitol; the palace was rough, fresh with the thatch of Romulus. And here the silver goose, fluttering through gilded colonnades, cried that the Gauls were on the threshold. The Gauls were near amid the thickets, laying hold of the fort, shielded by dark- ness, and the boon of shadowy night. Golden are their locks and golden their raiment; they glitter in striped cloaks, and their milk-white necks are en- twined with gold; two Alpine pikes each brandishes in hand, and long shields guard their limbs. Here he had wrought the dancing Salii and naked Luperci, the crests bound with wool, and the shields that fell from heaven; and in cushioned cars chaste matrons moved through the city in solemn progress. Away from these he adds also the abodes of Hell, the high gates of Dis, the penalties of sin, and thee, Catiline, hanging on a frowning cliff, and trembling at the faces of the Furies; far apart, the good, and Cato giving them laws. Amidst these scenes flowed wide the likeness of the swelling sea, all gold, but the blue waters foamed with white billows, and round about dolphins, shining in silver, swept the seas with their tails in circles, and cleft the tide. In the centre could be seen brazen ships with Actium's battle; one might see all Leucate aglow with War's array, and the waves ablaze with gold. Here Augustus Caesar, leading Italians to strife, with peers and people, and the great gods of the Penates, stands on the lofty stern; his joyous brows pour forth a double flame, and on his head dawns his father's star. Elsewhere Agrippa with favouring winds and gods, high-towering, leads his column; his brows gleam with the beaks of the naval crown, proud device of war. Plere Antonius with barbaric might and varied arms, victor from the nations of the dawn and from the ruddy sea,'' brings with him Egypt and the strength of the East and utmost Bactra; and there follows him (O shame !) his Egyptian wife. All rush on at once, and the whole sea foams, uptorn by the sweeping oars, and triple-pointed beaks. To the deep they speed; thou wouldst deem the Cyclades, uprooted, were floating on the main, or that mountains high clashed with mountains: in such mighty ships the seamen assail the towered sterns. Flaming tow and shafts of winged steel are showered from their hands; Neptune's fields redden with fresh slaughter. In the midst the queen calls upon her hosts with their native cymbal, nor as yet casts back a glance at the twin snakes behind. Monstrous gods of every form and barking Anubis wield weapons against Neptune and Venus and against Minerva. In the midst of the fray storms Mavors, embossed in steel, with the fell Furies from on high; and in rent robe Discord strides exultant, while Bellona follows her with bloody scourge. Actian Apollo saw the sight, and from above was bending his bow; at that terror all Egypt and India, all Arabians, all Sabaeans, turned to flee. The queen herself was seen to woo the winds, spread sail, and now, even now, fling loose the slackened sheets. Her, amid the carnage, the Lord of Fire had fashioned pale at the coming of death, borne on by waves and the wind of Iapyx; while over against her was the mourning Nile, of mighty frame, opening wide his folds and with all his raiment welcoming the vanquished to his azure lap and sheltering streams.2 But Caesar, entering the walls of Rome in triple triumph, was dedicating to Italy's gods his immortal votive gift— three hundred miglity fanes throughout the city. The streets rang with gladness and games and shouting; in all the temples was a band of matrons, in all were altars, and before the altars slain steers strewed the ground. Himself, seated at the snowy threshold of shining Phoebus, reviews the gifts of nations and hangs them on the proud portals. The conquered peoples move in long array, as diverse in fashion of dress and arms as in tongues. Here Mulciber had portrayed the Nomad race and the ungirt Africans, here the Leleges and Carians and quivered Gelonians. Euphrates moved now with humbler waves, and the Morini were there, furthest of mankind and the Rhine of double horn, the untamed Dahae, and Araxes chafing at his bridge.
