[896] Meanwhile among the forests the woeful tidings fill Turnus' ears, and Acca brings the warrior her tale of mighty turmoil: the Volscian ranks destroyed, Camilla fallen, the foe fiercely advancing and sweeping the field in triumphant warfare, the panic now passing to the town. He, raging — and Jove's stem will so demands — quits the hills' ambush, and leaves the rough woodland. Scarce had he passed from view and gained the plain, when father Aeneas, entering the unguarded pass, scales the ridge, and issues from the shady wood. So both march toward the walls, swiftly and in full force, nor far distant from each other: and at the same moment Aeneas descried afar the plain smoking with dust, and saw the Laurentine hosts, and Turnus v/as aware of fell Aeneas in arms, and heard the coming of feet and the snorting of steeds. And straightway would they enter the fray and essay conflict, but ruddy Phoebus now laves his weary team in the Iberian flood, and, as day ebbs, brings back the night. Before the city they encamp and strengthen the ramparts.[1] When Turnus sees the Latins crushed and faint of heart through war's reverse, his own pledge now claimed, and himself the mark of every eye, forth- with he blazes with wrath unappeasable and raises high his spirit. As in Punic fields a lion, when wounded, lo! with grievous stroke of huntsmen in the breast, then only wakes to war, joyously tosses from his neck his shaggy main, and snaps, un- daunted, the robber's implanted dart, roaring with blood-stained mouth: even so in Turnus' kindling soul the fury swells. Then thus he accosts the king, and with these wild words begins:
[11] " With Turnus lies no delay! no need is there for the coward sons of Aeneas to recall their words or to renounce their pact! I go to meet him. Bring the holy rites, sire, and frame the covenant. Either with this arm will I hurl to hell the Dardan, the Asian runaway — let the Latins sit and see it — and with my single sword refute the nation's shame; oi let him be lord of the vanquished, let Lavinia pass to him as bride! "
[18] To him Latinus with unruffled soul replied: "O youth of matchless spirit, the more in fierce valour thou dost excel, all the more heedfully is it meet that I ponder and with fear weigh every chance. Thou hast thy father Daunus' realms, hast many a town thy hand has taken; Latinus, too, has gold and good will. Other unwed maids there are in Latium and Laurentum's fields, and of no ignoble birth. Suffer me to utter this hard saying, stripped of all disguise, and withal drink this into thy soul: for me to ally my child to any of her old-time wooers, was forbidden, and this all gods and men foretold. Overborne by love of thee, overborne by kindred blood  and tears of my sorrowing queen, 1 broke all fetters, snatched the betrothed from her promised husband, and drew the unholy sword. From that day, Turnus, thou seest what perils, what wars pursue me, what heavy burdens thou above all dost bear. Twice vanquished in mighty battle, we scarce guard within our walls the hopes of Italy; Tiber's streams are still warm with our blood, the boundless plains still white with our bones. Why drift I back so often?  What madness turns my purpose? If, with Turnus dead, I am ready to link them to me as allies, why not rather end the strife while he still lives.'' What will thy Rutulian kins- men say, what the rest of Italy, if — Fortune refute the word! — I should betray thee to death, while thou wooest our daughter in marriage .'' Think on war's changes and chances; pity thine aged father, whom now his native Ardea parts far av.ay from us in sorrow! "
[45] In no wise do his words bend the fury of Turnus; still higher it mounts, more inflamed with the healing. Soon as he could speak he thus began: " The care thou hast on my behalf, most gracious lord, on my behalf, I pray, resign, and suffer me to barter death for fame. I too, sire, can scatter darts and no weakling steel from this right hand, and from my wounds too flows blood. Far from him will be his goddess- mother to shelter the runaway, woman-like, with a cloud, and to conceal herself in empty shadows."
[54] But the queen, dismayed by the new terms of conflict, wept, and clung to her fiery son, ready to die: "Turnus, by these my tears, by aught of reverence for Amata that yet may touch thy heart — thou art now our only hope, thou the comfort of my sad old age; in thine hands are the honour and sovereignty of Latinus, on thee rests all our sinking house — one boon I beg: forbear to fight the Trojans. What perils soever await thee in that combat of thine, await me also, Turnus; with thee I will quit this hateful light, nor in captivity see Aeneas as my son." Lavinia heard her mother's words, her burning cheeks steeped in tears, while a deep blush kindled its fire, and mantled o'er her glowing face. As when one stains Indian ivory with crimson dye, or as when white lilies blush with many a blended rose — such hues her maiden features showed. Him love throws into turmoil, and he fastens his looks upon the maid; then, fired yet more for the fray, briefly he addresses Amata:
[72] "Nay, I beseech thee, not with tears, not with such omen, as I pass to stern war's conflicts, do thou send me forth, O my mother; nor tinily has Turnus freedom to delay his death, Idmon, be my herald and bear this my message to the Phrygian king — message he will not welcome: soon as to-morrow's Dawn, riding in crimson car, reddens in the sky? let him not lead Teucrians against Rutulians — let Teucrian arms and Rutulians have rest — with our own blood let us settle the war; on that field be Lavinia wooed and won! "
[81] These words said, with haste withdrawing home, he calls for his steeds, and joys to see them neighing before his face — the steeds that Orithyia's self gave as a glory to Pilumnus, for that they excelled the snows in whiteness, the gales in speed. The eager charioteers stand round, patting with hollow palms their sounding chests, and combing their flowing manes. Next he binds upon his shoulders a corslet stiff with gold and pale mountain-bronze; withal, he fits for wear sword and shield and the horns of his ruddy crest ; the sword the divine Lord of Fire had himself wrought for his father Daunus and dipped, all glowing, in the Stygian wave. Then, his mighty spear, which stood leaning upon a giant column amid the hall, he seizes with strong hand, spoil of Auruncan Actor, and shakes it quivering, while he cries aloud: '' Now, O spear, that never failed my call, now the hour is come! Thee mighty Actor once bore; thee now the hand of Turnus wields. Grant me to lay low the body, with strong hand to tear and rend away the corslet of this Phrygian eunuch, and to defile in dust his locks, crisped with heated iron and bedrenched in myrrh! " Such is the frenzy driving him: from all his face shoot fiery sparks; his eager eyes flash flame — even as a bull, ere the battle begins, awakes a fearful bellowing, and, essaying to throw wrath into his horns, charges a tree's trunk; he lashes the winds with his blows, and paws the sand in prelude for the fray.
[107] Nor less, meantime, Aeneas, fierce in the arms his mother gave, whets his valour and stirs his heart with wrath, rejoicing that the war is settled by the compact offered. Then he comforts his comrades, and sad Iulus' fear, teaching them of fate, and bids bear firm answer to King Latinus and declare the terms of peace.
[113] Scarce was the morrow's dawn sprinkling the mountain-tops with light, what time the Sun's steeds first rise from the deep flood, and breathe light from uplifted nostrils, when Rutulians and Teucrians marched out and made ready the lists for the combat under the great city's walls, and in the midst hearths and grassy altars to their common deities. Others were bringing fountain-water and fire, draped in aprons - and their brows bound with vervain. Forth moved the Ausonian host, and troops, close-banded, pour from the crowded gates- On this side streams forth all the Trojan and Tyrrnene host in diverse armament, accoutred in steel, even as though the harsh battle-strife called them. Nor less, amid their thousands, the captains dart to and fro, brilliant in gold and purple, Mnestheus of the line of Assaracus, and brave Asilas, and Messapus, tamer of horses, seed of Neptune. Soon as, on given signal, each has retired to his own ground, they plant their spears in earth, and rest their shields against them. Then, eagerly streaming forth, mothers and the unarmed throng, and feeble old men, have beset towers and house-tops; others stand upon the lofty gates.
[134] But Juno, from the hill-summit now called Alban — at that time the mount had neither name nor fame nor honour — looking forth, gazed upon the plain, upon the double lines of Laurentum and Troy, and upon the city of Latinus. Straightway thus, goddess to goddess, she spake to Turnus' sister, mistress of the meres and sounding rivers: such dignity Jupiter, heaven's high lord, hallowed to her in return for theft of maidenhood: " O nymph, glory of rivers, to my heart most dear, thou knowest how, above all Latin maids that have mounted to high-souled Jove's thankless bed, thee alone I have preferred, and to thee have gladly given a place in heaven: learn, Juturna, the grief that will be thine, so that me thou mayest not blame. Where Fortune seemed to permit, and the Fates suffered Latiura'."' state to prosper, I shielded Turnus and thy city. Now I see the prince confront unequal destiny; and the day of doom and the enemy's stroke draw nigh. Upon this battle, this treaty, mine eyes cannot look: do thou, if thou darest aught of more present help for thy brother's sake, go on; it is thy part. Perchance on the unhappy happier days shall wait."
[154] Scarcely thus she spake, when Juturna's eyes streamed with tears, and thrice, yea four times, her hand smote her comely breast. " No time is this for tears," cries Saturnian Juno; " hasten, and if any means there be, snatch thy brother from death; or do thou waken battle, and dash from their hands the treaty they have framed. 'Tis I who bid thee dare." Thus having counselled, she left her doubtful and distracted in soul under the cruel wound.
[161] Meanwhile the kings ride forth, Latinus in mighty pomp drawn in four-horse car, twelve golden rays circling his gleaming brows, emblem of his ancestral Sun;  while Turnus comes behind a snow-white pair, his hand brandishing two spears with broad heads of steel. On this side father Aeneas, source of the Roman stock, ablaze with starry shield and celestial arms, and, close by, Ascanius, second hope of mighty Rome, issue from the camp; while in spotless raiment a priest has brought the young of a bristly boar and an unshorn sheep of two years old, and set the beasts beside the blazing altars. The heroes, turning their eyes to the rising sun, sprinkle salted meal from their hands, mark the foreheads of the victims with the knife, and from goblets pour libations on the altars. Then good Aeneas, drawing his sword, thus makes prayer:
[176] "Now be the Sun witness to my call, and this Earth, for whose sake I have been able to endure such travails, and the Father Almighty, and thou his consort, Saturnia — now kindlier, now at last, I pray, O goddess: and thou, famed Mavors, thou the sire that wieldest all warfare under thy sway; and on Founts and Floods I call, on all the majesty of high heaven and powers that tenant the blue seas: if haply vic- tory fall to Turnus the Ausonian, 'tis agreed that the vanquished withdraw to Evander's city. Iulus shall quit the soil; nor ever in after-time shall the sons of Aeneas return for renewed war, or attack this realm with the sword. But if Victory grant that the battle be ours — as I rather deem, and so rather may the gods confirm it with their power I — I will not bid the Italians be subject to Teucrians, nor do I seek the realm for mine; under equal terms let both nations, unconquered, enter upon an everlasting compact. Gods and their rites I will give; let Latinus, as my sire, keep the sword; as my sire, keep his wonted command. For me, the Teucrians shall raise walls, and Lavinia give the city her name."
[195] Thus first Aeneas, and after him Latinus thus follows, upUfting eyes to heaven, and outstretching his right hand to the stars: " By these same Powers I swear, Aeneas, by Earth, Sea, Stars, Latona's two- fold offspring, and two-faced Janus, and the might of gods below, and the shrines of cruel Dis: may the great Sire hear my words, who sanctions treaties with his thunderbolt! I touch the altars, I adjure these fires and gods that stand between us: no time shall break this peace and truce for Italy, howsoever things shall issue; nor shall any force turn aside my will, not though, commingling all in deluge, it should plunge land into water, and dissolve Heaven into Hell: even as this sceptre " (for haply in his hand he bore his sceptre) "shall never burgeon with light leafage into branch or shade, now that once hewn in the forest from the nether stem, it is refl of its mother, and beneath the steel has shed its leaves and twigs; once a tree, now the craftsman's hand has cased it in seemly bronze and given.it to sires of Latium to bear.'' With such words they sealed faith between them, amid the gazing lords; then over the flame duly slay the hallowed beasts, and tear out the live entrails, and pile the altars with laden chargers.
[216] But to the Rutulians long had the battle seemed unequal, and their hearts, swayed to and fro, had long been in turmoil; and now the more, the more closely they scan its ill-matched strength. Turnus swells the unrest by advancing with noiseless tread and humbly adoring the altar with downcast eye — swells it by his wasted cheeks and by the pallor of his youthful frame. Soon as Juturna his sister saw these whispers spread, and the hearts of the throng wavering in doubt, into the midmost ranks, in feigned semblance of Camers — noble his ancestral house, glorious the renown of his father's worth, himself most valiant in arms — into the midmost ranks she plunges, knowing well her task, scatters diverse rumours, and thus cries: " Are ye not ashamed, Rutulians, for all a host like ours to set at hazard one single life? In numbers, or in might, are we not their match? All of them, mark you, are here Trojans and Arcadians, and the fate-led bands of Etruria, hostile to Turnus: should but every other man of us join battle, scarce find we, each of us, a foe. He, indeed, shall mount on fame to the gods, to whose altars he vows his life, and shall move living on the lips of men:  we, our country lost, shall bow perforce to haughty masters — we, who to-day sit listless upon the fields! "
[238] With such words the warriors' resolve is kindled yet more and more, and a murmur creeps from rank to rank. Even the Laurentines, even the Latins are changed; and they who of late hoped for rest from the fray, and safety for their fortunes, now long for arms, pray the covenant may be undone, and pity Turnus' unjust fate. To these Juturna adds another and mightier impulse, and in high heaven shows a sign, than which none was more potent to confound Italian minds and cheat them with its miracle. For, flying through the ruddy sky, Jove's golden bird was chasing the fowls of the shore and the clamorous rout of their winged troop, when, swooping suddenly to the water, shameless he snatches up in his crooked talons a stately swan. All alert become the Italians, when lo! one and all, wondrous to behold, the birds wheel clamorously their flight, and, darkening the sky with wings, in serried cloud drive their foe through the air, till, overborne by the onset and the sheer weight, the bird gave way, dropped the booty from his talons into the stream, and sped far within the clouds.
[257] Then in truth the Rutulians hail the omen with a cheer and spread out their hands. And first of all Tolumnius the augur cries: "This it was, this, that mv vows have often sought! I accept it, I acknowledge the gods. With me, me at your head, snatch up the sword, O hapless people, whom, like frail birds, a shameless alien affrights with war, and rudely ravages your coasts. He too will take to flight, and spread sail far across the deep. Do ye with one accord close up your ranks, and defend in battle the king thus snatched from you! "
[266] He spoke, and, darting forward, hurled his spear full against the foe; the whistling cornel-shaft sings, and splits the air, unerring. With the deed, at once uprises a mighty shout, the crowds are all confusion, and their hearts heated with turmoil. On flies the spear, where, as it chanced, nine brethren of goodly stature stood in its path — the many borne of one faithful Tuscan wife to Arcadian Gylippus. One of these near the waist, where the stitched belt chafes the belly, and the buckle bites the linked sides- a youth of comely form and gleaming armour — it pierces clean through the ribs and stretches on the yellow sand. But of his brethren — a gallant band, and fired by grief — part draw their swords, part seize the missile steel, and rush blindly on. Against them charge the Laurentine columns; from their side again pour thickly in Trojans and Agyllines and Arcadians with blazoned arms. Thus all are ruled by one passion, to let the sword decide. Lo! they have stripped the altars; through the whole sky flies a thickening storm of javelins and the iron rain falls fast: bowls and hearth-fires are carried off. Latinus himself takes flight, bearing back his defeated gods, the covenant now void; the others rein their cars or vault upon their steeds and with drawn swords are on the scene.
[266] Messapus, eager to rend the truce asunder, with charging steed affrights Tuscan Aulestes, a king and wearing a king's device. Backward he rushes, and whirled, poor man, upon the altars behind, is thrown on head and on shoulders. But Messapus flashes forth like fire, spear in hand, and, aloft on his horse, smites heavily down upon him with massive shaft, though sorely he pleads; then cries thus: " He has it; - here is a nobler victim given to the mighty gods!" The Italians crowd around and strip his warm limbs. Standing in the path, Corynaeus snatches up a charred brand from the altar, and as Ebysus comes up and aims a blow, dashes flames in his face: his mighty beard blazed up, and sent forth a smell of fire. Then himself pursuing the stroke, he clutches in his left hand the locks of his bewildered foe, and with thrust of his bended knee bears his body to earth, and there smites his side with unyielding sword. Podalirius, pursuing with naked steel, overhangs the shepherd Alsus, as in foremost line he rushes amid the darts; but Alsus, swinging back his axe, severs full in front his enemy's brow and chin, and drenches his armour with widely spattered gore. Stern repose and iron slumber press upon his eyes, and their orbs close in everlasting night.
[311] But good Aeneas, with head bared, was stretch- ing forth his unarmed hand, and calling loudly to his men: "Whither do ye rush? What means this sudden outburst of strife? O curb your rage! Truce is already stricken, and all its terms fixed; mine alone is the right to do battle. Give me way and banish fears; this hand shall prove the treaty true; already these rites make Turnus mine! " Amid these cries, amid such words, lo! against him a whizzing arrow winged its way, launched by what hand, sped whirling by whom, none knows, nor who — chance or god — brought Rutulians such honour: hidden is the fame of that high deed, and no one vaunted him of the wounding of Aeneas.
[324] Soon as Turnus saw Aeneas withdrawing from the ranks, and his captains in confusion, he glows with the fire of sudden hope, calls for horses, calls for arms, with a bound leaps proudly into his chariot, and firmly grasps the reins. In his swift course many a brave man's body he gives to death; many a man he tumbles half-slain, or crushes whole ranks beneath his car, or, seizing spear after spear, showers them upon the fugitives. Even as when, at full speed, by the streams of icy Hebrus blood-stained Mavors thunders with his shield, and, rousing war, gives rein to his frenzied steeds; they o'er the open plain outstrip the South wind and the West; utmost Thrace moans with the beat of their hoofs, and around him speed black Terror's forms, and Anger, and Ambush, attendants on the god: - with Hke eagerness amid the fray Turnus goads his sweat-smoking horses, piteously trampling on the slain foe; the galloping hoof splashes bloody dews, and spurns the gore and mingled sand. And now he has given Sthenelus to death, and Thamyrus, and Pholus, these in close encounter, the first from afar; from afar the sons of Imbrasus, Glaucus and Lades, whom Imbrasus himself had nurtured in Lycia and equipped with like arms, either to fight hand to hand or on horseback to outstrip the winds.
[346] Elsewhere Eumedes rides to the midmost fray, war-famed scion of ancient Dolon, in name renewing his grandsire, in heart and hand his sire, who of old, for going in espial to the Danaan camp, dared to ask as his wage the car of Peleus' son; but for such daring far other wage did the son of Tydeus pay him, and no more sets he his hopes upon Achilles' steeds. Him Turnus descries afar on the open plain, and, first following him with light javelin through the long space between them, then stays his twin-yoked steeds, and leaps from his car; now descends on the fallen, dying man, and, planting his foot on his neck, wrests the sword from his hand, dyes the glittering blade deep in his throat, and adds these words withal: " Lo! Trojan, lie there, and measure out the fields and that Hesperia thou didst seek in war: such meed is theirs, who dare to tempt me with the sword; so stablish they their walls!" Then with cast of spear he sends Asbytes to bear him company and Chloreus and Sybaris, Dares and Thersilochus, and Thymoetes, flung from the neck of his restive horse. And as when the blast of the Edonian North- wind roars on the deep Aegean, and drives the billows shoreward; where the winds swoop, the clouds scud through the sky: so, wherever Turnus cleaves a path, the ranks give way, and lines turn and run; his own speed bears him on, and the breeze, as his chariot meets it, tosses his flying plume. Phegeus brooked not his onset and fiery rage; before the chariot he flung himself, and with his right hand wrenched aside the jaws of the furious steeds, foaming on the bits. While he is dragged along clinging to the yoke, the broad spear-head reaches his unguarded side, rends the two-plated corslet where it lodged, and with its wound just grazes the surface of the flesh. Yet he, with shield before him, turned and was making for his foe, seeking succour from his drawn sword, when the wheel and axle, whirling onward, struck him headlong and flung him to the ground, and Turnus, following, with sweep of blade between the helmet's lowest rim and the breastplate's upper edge, smote off his head, and left the trunk upon the sand.
[383] And while Turnus thus victoriously deals havoc over the plains, Mncstheus meantime and loyal Achates, and Ascanius by their side, set down Aeneas in the camp, all bleeding and staying every other step upon his long spear. Raging, he struggles to pluck out the head of the broken shaft, and calls for the nearest road to relief, bidding them with broad sword cut the wound, tear open to the bottom the weapon's lair, and send him back to battle. And now drew near lapyx, lasus' son, dearest beyond others to Phoebus, to whom once gladly did Apollo's self, with love's sting smitten, offer his own arts, his own powers— his augury, his lyre and swift arrows. He, to defer the fate of a sire sick unto death, chose rather to know the virtues of herbs and the practice of healing, and to ply, inglorious, the silent arts. Bitterly chafing, Aeneas stood propped on his mighty spear, amid a great concourse of warriors along with sorrowing Iulus, himself unmoved b}' their tears. The aged leech, with robe rolled back, and girt in Paeonian fashion, with healing hand and Phoebus' potent herbs makes much ado — in vain; in vain with his hand pulls at the dart, and with gripping tongs tugs at the steel. No Fortune guides his path, in no wise does Apollo's counsel aid: and more and more the fierce alarm swells o'er the plains, and nigher draws disaster. Now they see the sky upborne on columns of dust; on come the horsemen, and shafts fall tliick amidst the camp. Heavenward mounts the dismal cry of men that fight and men that fall beneath the stern War-god's hand.
[411] Hereupon Venus, smitten by her son's cruel pain, with a mother's care plucks from Cretan Ida a dittany  stalk, clothed with downy leaves and purple flower; not unknown is that herb to wild goats, when winged arrows have lodged in their flank. This Venus bore down, her face veiled in dim mist; this she steeps with secret healing in the river-water poured into bright-brimming ewer, and sprinkles ambrosia's healthful juices and fragrant panacea. With that water aged Iapyx laved the wound, unwitting; and suddenly, of a truth, all pain fled from the body, all blood was staunched deep in the wound. And now, following his hand, without constraint, the arrow fell out, and newborn strength returned, as of yore. " Quick I bring him arms! Why stand ye? " loudly cries Iapyx, foremost to fire their spirit against the foe. " Not by mortal aid comes this, not by masterful art, nor doth hand of mine save thee, Aeneas; a mightier one — a god — works here, and sends thee back to mightier deeds." He, eager for the fray, had sheathed his legs in gold, on right and left, and, scorning delay, is brandishing his spear. Soon as the shield is fitted to his side, and the corslet to his back, he clasps Ascanius in armed embrace, and, lightly kissing his lips through the helm, he cries: "Learn valour from me, my son, and true toil; fortune from others. To-day my hand shall shield thee in war and lead thee where are great rewards: see thou, when soon thy years have grown to ripeness, that thou be mindful thereof, and, as thou recallest the pattern of thy kin, let thy sire Aeneas, and thy uncle Hector stir thy soul !"
[441] These words uttered, forth from the gates he passed in his might, his hand brandishing a massive spear: with him rush Antheus and Mnestheus in serried column, and all the throng streams from the forsaken camp. Then the plain is a turmoil of blinding dust, and the startled earth trembles under the tramp of feet. From the facing rampart Turnus saw them coming; the Ausonians saw, and a cold shudder ran through their inmost marrow: first before all the Latins Juturna heard and knew the sound, and in terror fled away. Aeneas wings his way, and sweeps his dark column over the open plain. As when a tempest bursts, and a storm-cloud moves towards land through mid ocean, the hearts of hapless husbandmen, alas! know it from far and shudder — downfall will it bring to trees and havoc to crops, it will o'erthrow all far and wide — before it fly the winds, and waft their voices shoreward: even so the Rhoeteian  chief full against the foe brings up his band; densely they gather, each and all, to his side in close -packed columns. Thymbraeus smites mighty Osiris with the sword, Mnestheus slays Arcetius, Achates Epulo, Gyas Ufens; falls too even the augur Tolumnius, who first had hurled his spear full against the foe. A shout rises to heaven, and in turn the routed Rutulians mid clouds of dust turn their backs in flight across the fields. Himself he deigns not to lay low the fugitives in death nor assails he such as meet him foot to foot or wield their darts: Turnus alone he, with searching glance, tracks out through the thick gloom, alone summons to battle.
[468] Stricken in heart with such fear, Juturna, the warrior-maid, flings forth Metiscus, Turnus' charioteer, from amid his reins, and leaves him afar, fallen from the pole; herself takes his place, and guides with her hands the flowing thongs, assuming all that Metiscus had, — his voice, form, arms. As when a black swallow flits through a rich lord's ample mansion and wings her way through stately halls, gleaning for her chirping nestlings tiny crumbs and scraps of food, and twitters now in the empty courts, now about the watery pools: even so Juturna is borne by the steeds through the enemy's midst, and winging her way in swift chariot scours all the field. And now here, and now there, she displays her triumphant brother, yet suffers him not to close in fight, but flits far away. None the less Aeneas threads the winding maze to meet him, and tracks his steps, and amid the scattered ranks with loud cry calls him. Oft as he cast eyes on his foe and strove by running to match the flight of the winged steeds, so oft Juturna turned and wheeled her car. Ah, what to do? Vainly he tosses on a shifting tide, and conflicting cares call his mind this way and that. Against him Messapus, who haply in left hand bore two tough shafts tipped with steel, lightly advancing, levels one and whirls it with unerring stroke. Aeneas halted, and gathered himself behind his shield, sinking upon his knee; yet the swift spear bore off his helmet-peak, and dashed from his head the topmost plumes. Then indeed his wrath swells, and o'erborne by the treachery, when he sees that the steeds and chariot of his foe are withdrawn afar, having oft appealed to Jove and the altars of the broken treaty, now at last he plunges into the midst, and adown the tide of war terribly awakes grim indiscriminate carnage, flinging loose all the reins of passion.
[500] What god can now unfold for me so many horrors, who in song can tell such diverse deaths, and the fall of captains, whom now Turnus, now the Trojan hero, drives in turn o'er all the plain? Was it thy will, O Jupiter, that in so vast a shock should clash nations that thereafter would dwell in everlast- ing peace? Aeneas, meeting Rutulian Sucro, — that combat first brought the Trojan onset to a stand — with brief delay smites him upon the flank, and, where death comes speediest, drives the cruel steel through the ribs that fence the chest. Turnus dis- mounts Amycus and his brother Diores, and, assailing them on foot, strikes the one with long spear as he advances, the other with his sword; then, hanging from his car the severed heads of the twain, he bears them off dripping with blood. Aeneas sends to death Talos and Tanais and brave Cethegus, three at one onslaught, and sad Onites, of Echionian name, whose mother was Peridia; Turnus the brothers sent from Lycia and Apollo's fields,- and young Menoetes of Arcadia, who loathed warfare in vain: round fish- haunted Lerna's streams had been his craft and humble home, nor knew he the portals of the great, but his father sowed on hired soil. And like fires launched from opposing sides upon a dry forest and thickets of crackling laurel, or as when in swift descent from mountain-heights foaming rivers roar and race seaward, each leaving its own path waste: with no less fury the twain, Aeneas and Turnus, sweep through the battle; now, now wrath surges within them; bursting are their hearts, knowing not to yield; now, with main strength, they rush upon wounds.
[529] Murranus, as he vaunts of grandsires, and grandsires' sires of ancient name, and a whole line traced through Latin kings, headlong with a stone and mighty whirling rock Aeneas dashes down and tumbles on the ground; under reins and yoke the wheels rolled him along, and o'er him, trampling him down with many a beat, rush the hoofs of the steeds that remember not their lord. The other, as Hyllus rushes on with boundless fury at heart, meets him and whirls a dart at his gold-bound brow: piercing the helm, the spear stood fast in his brain. Nor did thy right hand, Cretheus, thou bravest of the Greeks, save thee from Turnus, nor did his gods shield their Cupencus when Aeneas came:  he put his breast in the weapon's path, and the brazen buckler's stay, alas! availed him not. Thee too, Aeolus, the Laurentine plains saw sink, and spread thy frame abroad o'er the earth: thou fallest, whom the Argive battalions could not lay low, nor Achilles, destroyer of Priam's realms. Here was thy bourne of death; beneath Ida was thy stately home, — thy stately home at Lyrnesus, in Laurentine soil thy sepulchre. Yea, the whole lines, turning to the fray — all the Latins and all the Greeks, Mnestheus and valiant Serestus; Messapus, tamer of horses, and brave Asilas; the Tuscan battalion and Evander's Arcadian squadrons — each doing his all, strain with utmost force of strength; no stint, no stay; in measureless conflict they struggle.
[554] Hereupon his beauteous mother inspired Aeneas with the thought to advance on the walls, fling his column on the town, and confound the Latins with sudden disaster. While he, tracking Turnus here and there throughout the host, swept his glance this way and that, he views the city free from that fierce warfare, peaceful and unharmed. Straightway a vision of greater battle fires his heart; he calls his captains, Mnestheus and Sergestus, and brave Serestus, and plants himself on a mounds where the rest of the Teucrian host throng thickly around, yet drop not shield nor spear. Standing in their midst on the mounded height he cries: " Let naught delay my command; God is on our side; nor let any, I pray, be slower to advance because the venture is so sudden. Yon city, the cause of war, the very seat of Latinus' realm, unless they consent to receive our yoke, and to submit as vanquished, this very day will I o'erthrow, and lay its smoking roofs level with the ground. Am I, forsooth, to wait till it be Turnus' humour to bide battle with me, and till, once beaten, he choose to meet me a second time? This, fellow-citizens, is the head, this the sum, of the accursed war. Bring brands with speed, and in fire reclaim the treaty." He ceased, — and lo! with hearts alike emulous, all form a wedge and advance in serried mass to the walls. In a moment ladders and sudden flames are seen. Some rush to the several gates and cut down the foremost guards; others hurl their steel and veil the sky with javelins. Himself in the van, Aeneas uplifts his hand to the walls, loudly reproaches Latinus, and calls the gods to witness that again he is forced into battle, that twice the Italians become his foes, and that this treaty is the second broken. Strife uprises among the startled citizens: some bid unbar the town and throw wide the gates to the Dardans, and would drag the king himself to the ramparts; others bring arms, and haste to defend the walls. As when some shepherd has tracked bees to their lair in rocky covert, and filled it with stinging smoke; they within, startled for their safety, scurry to and fro through the waxen fortress, and with loud buzzings whet their rage; the black reek rolls through their dwelling, the rocks within hum with hidden murmur, and smoke issues to the empty air,
[593] This further fate befell the labouring Latins, and shook the whole city to her base with grief. When from her palace the queen sees the foe approach, the walls assailed, flames mounting to the roofs, yet nowhere Rutulian ranks, no troops of Turnus to meet them, alas! she thinks her warrior slain in combat, and, her mind distraught by sudden anguish, cries out that she is the guilty source and spring of sorrows, and uttering many a wild word in the frenzy of grief, resolved to die, rends her purple robes, and from a lofty beam fastens the noose of a hideous death. Soon as the unhappy Latin women learned this disaster, first her daughter Lavinia, her hand tearing her flowery tresses and roseate cheeks, then all the throng around her, madly rave; the wide halls ring with lamentations. Thence the woe- ful rumour spreads throughout the town. Hearts sink; with rent raiment goes Latinus dazed at his wife's doom and his city's downfall, defiling his hoary hairs with showers of unclean dust.
[614] Meanwhile Turnus, battling on the plain's far edge, is pursuing scanty stragglers, slacker now and less and less exultant in the triumph of his steeds. To him the breeze bore that cry blended with terrors unknown, and on his straining ears smote the sound and joyless murmur of the town in turmoil. "Ah me! what is this great sorrow that shakes the walls? What is this cry speeding from the distant town? " So he speaks, and in frenzy draws in the reins and halts. Thereon his sister, as, changed to the form of his charioteer Metiscus, she guided car and steeds and reins, meets him with these words: *•' This way, Turnus, pursue we the sons of Troy, where victory first opens a path; others there are whose hands can guard their homes. Aeneas falls upon the Italians with turmoil of battle; let our hand too deal fierce havoc among his Teucrians ' Neither in tale of dead, nor in fame of war, shalt thou come off" the worse." To this Turnus: " Sister, both long since I knew thee, when first thou didst craftily mar the pact and fling thyself into this war, and now thou vainly hidest thy deity. But who willed that thou be sent down from Olympus to bear such sore toils? Was it that thou mightest see thy hapless brother's cruel death? For what may I do? Or what chance can now assure me safety? Before my very eyes, as loudly he called upon me, have I seen Murranus fall, — no other dearer than he is left me — a mighty soul and laid low by a mighty wound. Fallen is luckless Ufens, that so he might not view our shame: the Teucrians hold his corpse and armour. The razing of their homes — the one thing lacking to my lot— shall I endure it, nor with my sword refute Drances' taunts? Shall I turn my back, and shall this land see Turnus in flight? Is death all so sad .'' Be kind to me, ye Shades, since the gods above have turned their faces from me. A stainless soul, and ignorant of that reproach, I will descend to you, never unworthy of my mighty sires of old! "
[650] Scarce had he spoken, when lo! borne on foaming steed through the foemen's midst speeds Saces, wounded full in face by an arrow, and, rushing on, calls for aid by name on Turnus: " Turnus, in thee lies our last hope; pity thy people! Aeneas thunders in arms, and threatens to overthrow Italy's highest towers and give them to destruction: even now brands are flying to the roofs. To thee the Latins turn their looks, to thee their eyes; King Latinus himself mutters in doubt, whom to call his sons, or towards what alliance to incline. Moreover the queen, all whose trust was in thee, has fallen by her own hand, and fled in terror from the light. Alone before the gates Messapus and valiant Atinas sustain our lines. Around these on either side stand serried squadrons, and a harvest of steel bristles with drawn swords; yet thou wheelest thy car o'er the deserted sward." Aghast and bewildered by the changeful picture of disaster, Turnus stood mutely gazing; within that single heart surges mighty shame, and madness mingled with grief, and love stung by fury, and the consciousness of worth. Soon as the shadows scattered and light dawned afresh on his mind, his blazing eyeballs he turned wrathfully upon the walls and from his car looked back upon the spacious city.
[672] But lo! from storey to storey a rolling spire of flame was eddying heavenward, and fastening upon a tower — a tower that he himself had reared of jointed beams and set on wheels and slung with lofty gang- ways. " Now, my sister, now Fate triumphs: cease to hinder; where God and cruel Fortune call, let us follow! Resolved am I to meet Aeneas, resolved to bear in death all its bitterness; nor longer, sister mine, shalt thou behold me shamed. With this madness suffer me ere the end, I pray, to be a madman." He said, and leapt quickly from his car to the field, and rushing through foes and through spears, leaves his sorrowing sister, and burst in rapid course amid their columns. And as when a rock from mountain-top rushes headlong, torn away by the blast — whether the whirling storm has washed it free, or time stealing on with lapse of years has loosened it; down the steep with mighty rush sweeps the reckless mass, and bounds over the earth, rolling with it trees, herds, and men: so amid the scattered ranks Turnus rushes to the city-walls, where the ground is deepest drenched with spilled blood, and the air is shrill with spears; then beckons with his hand and thus begins aloud: " Forbear now, Rutulians, and ye Latins, stay your darts. Whatever fortune is here is mine; 'tis better that I alone in your stead atone for the covenant, and decide the issue with the sword." All drew apart from the midst and gave him room.
[697] But father Aeneas, hearing Turnus' name, forsakes the walls, forsakes the lofty fortress, flings aside all delay, breaks off all tasks, and, exultant with joy, thunders terribly on his arms: vast as Athos, vast as Eryx or vast as Father Apennine himself, when he roars with his quivering oaks, and joyously lifts heavenward his snowy head. Now indeed, all turned emulous eyes, — Rutulians, and Trojans, and Italians, both they who held the lofty ramparts, and they whose ram battered the walls below — and doffed the armour from their shoulders. Latinus himself is amazed that these mighty men, born in far distant climes, are met together and make decision with the sword. And they, soon as the lists were clear on the open plain, dash swiftly forward, first hurling their spears from far, and rush on the fray with shields and clanging brass. Earth groans; then with the sword they shower blow on blow, chance and valour blending in one. And as in mighty Sila or on Taburnus' height, when two bulls charge, brow to brow, in mortal battle, back in terror fall the keepers, the whole herd stands mute with dread, and the heifers dumbly ponder who shall be lord of the forest, whom all the herds shall follow; they with mighty force deal mutual wounds, gore with butting horns, and bathe neck and shoulders in streaming blood; all the woodland re-echoes with the bellowing: even so Trojan Aeneas and the Daunian hero clash shield on shield; the mighty crash fills the sky. Jupiter himself upholds two scales in even balance, and lays therein the diverse destinies of both, whom the strife dooms, and with whose weight death sinks down.
[728] Now forth springs Turnus, deeming it safe, rises full height on his uplifted sword, and strikes. The Trojans and expectant Latins cry aloud; both hosts are on tiptoe with excitement. But the traitorous sword snaps, and in mid stroke fails its fiery lord, did not flight come to his succour. Swifter than the East wind he flies, soon as he marks an unknown hilt in his defenceless hand. Fame tells that in his headlong haste, when first mounting behind his yoked steeds for battle, he left his father's blade behind and in his haste snatched up the steel of Metiscus his charioteer; and for long that served, while the straggling Teucrians turned their backs: but when it met the god-wrought armour of Vulcan, the mortal blade, like brittle ice, Hew asunder at the stroke; the fragments glitter on the yellow sand. So Turnus madly flees here and there over the plain, and now this way and now that entwines wavering circles; for on all hands the Teucriaas enclosed him in crowded ring, and here a waste fen, there steep ramparts engirdle him.
[740] Nor less, though at times his knees, retarded by the arrow-wound, impede him and deny their speed, does Aeneas pursue, and hotly press, foot to foot, upon his panting foe: as when a hunter hound has caught a stag, pent in by a stream, or hedged about by the terror of crimson feathers, and, running and barking, presses him close; the stag, in terror of the snares and lofty bank, flees to and fro in a thousand ways, but the keen Umbrian clings close with jaws agape, and now, now grips, or, as though he gripped, snaps his jaws, and baifled, bites on naught. Then indeed uprises the din; banks and pools around make answer, and all heaven thunders with the tumult. Turnus, even as he flees, even then upbraids all the Rutulians, calling each by name, and clamouring for the sword he knew. Aeneas in turn threatens death and instant doom, should one draw nigh, and alFrights his trembling foes with threats to raze the town, and though wounded presses on. Five circles they cover at full speed, and unweave as many this way and that; for no slight or sportive prize they seek, but for Turnus' life and blood they strive.
[766] Haply here had stood a bitter-leaved wild olive, sacred to Faunus, a tree revered of old by mariners, whereon, when saved from the waves, they were wont to fasten their gifts to the god of Laurentum and hang up their votive raiment; but the Teucrians, heeding naught, had shorn the sacred stem, that in clear lists they might contend. Here stood the spear of Aeneas; hither its force had borne it, and was holding it fast in the tough root. The Dardan stooped, fain to pluck away the steel perforce, and pursue with javelin him he could not catch by speed of foot. Then indeed Turnus, frantic with terror, cried: " Faunus, have pity, I pray, and thou, most gracious Earth, hold fast the steel, if ever I have reverenced your worship, which, in otiier wise, Aeneas' sons have defiled by war." He spoke, and to no fruitless vow did he invoke the aid of heaven. For long though he wrestled and lingered o'er the stubborn stem, by no strength availed Aeneas to unlock the oaken bite. While fiercely he tugs and strains, the Daunian goddess, changing once again into the form of charioteer Metiscus, runs forward and restores the sword to her brother. But Venus, wroth that such license is granted the bold nymph, drew nigh, and plucked the weapon from the deep root. At full height, in arms and heart renewed — one trusting to his sword, one fiercely towering with his spear — breathless both, they stand facing the War-god's strife.
[791] Meanwhile the king of almighty Olympus accosts Juno, as from a golden cloud she gazes on the fray: " What now shall be the end, O wife? What remains at the last? Thyself knowest, and dost confess to know it, that Aeneas, as Hero of the land, is claimed of heaven, and the Fates exalt him to the stars. What plannest thou? Or in what hope lingerest thou in the chill clouds? Was it well that by mortal's wound a god should be profaned? or that the lost sword — for without thee what could Juturna avail? — should be restored to Turnus, and the vanquished gain fresh force? Cease now, I pray, and bend to our entreaties, that such great grief may not consume thee in silence, nor to me may bitter cares so oft return from thy sweet lips. The end is reached. To chase the Trojans over land or wave, to kindle monstrous war, to mar a home with mourning and blend bridals with woe — this power hast thou had; farther to attempt I forbid! " Thus Jupiter began: thus, with downcast look, the goddess, child of Saturn, replied:
[808] "Even because I knew, great Jove, that such was thy pleasure, have I, though loth, left Turnus and the earth; else wouldst thou not see me now, alone on my airy throne, enduring fair and foul; but girt in flame would I take my stand close to the very ranks, and drag the Teucrians into deadly fray. As for Juturna, I counselled her, I own, to succour her hapless brother, and for his life's sake sanctioned still greater deeds of daring, yet not to level the arrow, not to bend the bow: I swear by the inexorable fountain-head of Styx, sole name of dread ordained for gods above. And now I yield, yea, yield, and quit the strife in loathing. This boon, banned by no law of fate, for Latium's sake, for thine own kin's greatness, I entreat from thee: when anon with happy bridal rites — so be it I — they plight peace, when anon they join in laws and treaties, command not the native Latins to change their ancient name, nor to become Trojans and be called Teucrians, nor to change their tongue and alter their attire: let Latium be, let Alban kings endure through ages, let be a Roman stock, strong in Italian valour: fallen is Troy, and fallen let her be, together with her name! "
[829] Smiling on her, the creator of men and things replied: " True sister of Jove art thou, and Saturn's other child, such waves of wrath surge deep within thy breast! But come, allay the rage thus vainly stirred: I grant thy wish, and yield me, conquered and content. Ausonia's sons shall keep their fathers' speech and ways, and as it is, so shall be their name: the Teucrians shall but sink down, merged in the mass. Their sacred laws and rites will I add and make all to be Latins of one tongue. Hence shall arise a race, blended with Ausonian blood, which thou shalt see o'erpass m.en, o'erpass gods in godliness, nor shall any nation with equal zeal celebrate thy worship." Juno assented thereto and joyfully changed her purpose; meanwhile she passes from heaven, and quits the cloud.
[843] This done, the Father revolves another purpose in his heart, and prepares to withdraw Juturna from her brother's side. Men tell of twin fiends, the Dread Ones named, whom with hellish Megaera untimely Night bore in one and the same birth, wreathing them alike with snaky coils and clothing them with wings of wind. These attend by the throne of Jove, and on the threshold of the grim monarch, and whet the fears of feeble mortals, whene'er heaven's king deals diseases and awful death, or affrights guilty towns with war. One of these Jove sent swiftly down from high heaven, and bade her meet Juturna as a sign. She wings her way, and darts to earth in swift whirlwind. Even as an arrow, shot from string through a cloud, which, armed with gall of fell poison, a Parthian — a Parthian or a Cydonian — has launched, a shaft beyond all cure; whizzing, it leaps through the swift shadows, known of none: so sped the child of Night, and sought the earth. Soon as she sees the Ilian ranks and Turnus' troops, suddenly shrinking to the shape of that small bird which oft, perched at night on tombs or deserted roofs, chants her late, ill-omened lay amid the shadows, so changed in form before the face of Turnus the fiend flits screaming to and fro, and wildly beats his buckler with her wings. A strange numbness unknits his limbs with dread; his hair stood up in terror and the voice clave to his throat.
[869] But when from afar Juturna knew the Dread One's whizzing wings, she rends, hapless one, her loosened tresses, marring, in sisterly grief, her face with nails and her breast with clenched hands: "What now, my Turnus, can thy sister avail thee? Or what more awaits me, that have endured so much? With what art may I prolong thy day? Can I face such a portent? Now, now I quit the field. Affright not my fluttering soul, ye ill-boding birds! I know your beating wings, and their dreadful sound, nor fail I to mark the haughty mandates of high-hearted Jove. Is this his requital for my maidenhood? Wherefore gave he me life eternal? Why of the law of death am I bereaved? Now surely could I end such anguish, and pass at my poor brother's side amid the shadows I I immortal I Nay, will aught of mine be sweet to me without thee, my brother? O what deepest earth can gape enough for me, and send me down, a goddess, to the nether- most shades?" So saying, she veiled her head in mantle of grey and with many a moan the goddess plunged into the deep river.
[887] Aeneas presses on against the foe, brandishing his massy, tree-like spear, and, in wrathful spirit, thus cries: " What more delay is there now? or why, Turnus, dost tliou yet draw back? Not with swift foot, but hand to hand in fierce arms, must we contend. Change thyself into all shapes, yea, muster all thy powers of courage or of skill; wing thy flight, if thou wilt, to the stars aloft, or hide thee within earth's hollow prison! " The other, shaking his head: "Thy fiery words, fierce one, daunt me not; 'tis the gods daunt me, and the enmity of Jove." No more he speaks, then glancing round, espies a giant stone, a giant stone and ancient, which haply lay upon the plain, set for a landmark, to ward dispute from the fields. This scarce twice six chosen men could uplift upon their shoulders, men of such frames as earth now begets: but the hero, with hurried grasp, seized and hurled it at his foe, rising to his height and at swiftest speed. But he knows not himself as he runs, nor as he moves, as he raises his hands, or throws the mighty stone; his knees totter, his blood is frozen cold. Yea, the hero's stone itself, whirled through the empty void, traversed not all the space, nor carried home its blow. And as in dreams of night, when languorous sleep has weighed down our eyes, we seem to strive vainly to press on our eager course, and in mid effort sink helpless: our tongue lacks power, our wonted strength fails our limbs, nor voice nor words ensue: so to Turnus, howsoe'er by valour he sought to win his way, the dread goddess denies fulfilment. Then through his soul shifting fancies whirl; he gazes on his Rutulians and the town, he falters in fear, and trembles at the threatening lance; neither sees he whither he may escape, nor with what force bear against the foe; nor anywhere is his car, nor his sister, the charioteer.
[919] As he wavers, Aeneas brandishes the fateful spear, seeking with his eyes the happy chance, then hurls it from far with all his strength. Never stone shot from engine of siege roars so loud, never crash so great bursts from thunderbolt. Like black whirlwind on flies the spear, bearing fell destruction, and pierces the corslet's rim and the sevenfold shield's utmost circle: whizzing it passes right through the thigh. Under the blow, with knee beneath him bent down to earth, huge Turnus sank. Up spring with a groan the Rutulians all; the whole hill re-echoes round about, and far and near the wooded steeps send back the sound. He, in lowly suppliance, uplifting eyes and pleading hands: " Yea, I have earned it," he cries, "and I ask not mercy; use thou thy chance. If any thought of a parent's grief can touch thee, I pray thee — in Anchises thou, too, hadst such a father — pity Daunus' old age, and give back me, or, if so thou please, my lifeless body, to my kin. Victor thou art; and as vanquished, have the Ausonians seen me stretch forth my hands: Lavinia is thine for wife; press not thy hatred further."
[938] Fierce in his arms, Aeneas stood with rolling eyes, and staged his hand; and now more and more, as he paused, these words began to sway him, when lo! high on the shoulder was seen the luckless baldric, and there flashed the belt with its well-known studs — belt of young Pallas, whom Turnus had smitten and stretched vanquished on earth, and now wore on his shoulders his foeman's fatal badge. The other, soon as his eyes drank in the trophy, that memorial of cruel grief, fired with fury and terrible in his wrath: " Art thou, thou clad in my loved one's spoils, to be snatched hence from my hands? 'Tis Pallas, Pallas who with this stroke sacrifices thee, and takes atonement of thy guilty blood! " So saying, full in his breast he buries the sword with fiery zeal. But the other's limbs grew slack and chill, and with a moan life passed indignant to the Shades below.