[1] Thou, too, Caieta, nurse of Aeneas, hast by thy death given deathless fame to our shores; and still thine honour guards thy resting-place, and in great Hesperia, if such glory be aught, thy name marks thy dust.
[5] But good Aeneas, when the last rites were duly paid and the funeral mound was raised, soon as the high seas were stilled, sails forth on his way and leaves the haven. Breezes blow on into the night, and the Moon, shining bright, forbids not the voyage; the sea glitters beneath her dancing beams. Closely they skirt the shores of Circe's land, where the rich daughter of the Sun thrills her untrodden groves with ceaseless song, and in her stately halls burns fragrant cedar to illuminate the night, as with shrill shuttle she sweeps the fine-spun web. Hence could be heard the angry growls of lions chafing at their bonds and roaring in midnight hours, the raging of bristly boars and encaged bears, and howls from shapes of monstrous wolves; whom with her potent herbs Circe, cruel goddess, had changed from the likeness of men, clothing them in the features and frames of beasts. But lest the good Trojans should suffer such monstrous fate, should enter the haven or draw near the cursed shore, Neptune filled their sails with favouring winds, and gave them escape, and bore them past the seething shallows.
[25] And now the sea was reddening with the rays of dawn, and from high heaven saffron-hued Aurora shone in roseate car, when the winds fell, and every breath sank suddenly, and the oar blades strive amid the sluggish calm of waters. Then lo! Aeneas, gazing forth from the flood, sees a mighty forest. Through its midst the Tiber, with pleasant stream, leaps forth to sea in swirling eddies and yellow with plenteous sand. Around and above, birds of varied plumes, that haunt the banks and river-channel, charmed the sky with song, and flitted amid the forest. He bids his comrades change their course and turn their prows to land, and joyfully enters the shady river.
[37] Awake now, Erato! Who were the kings, what was the tide of events, how stood ancient Latium, when first that stranger host beached its barques on Ausonia's shore — this will I unfold; and the prelude of the opening strife will I recall. Thou, goddess, do thou prompt thy bard! I will tell of grim wars, will tell of battle array, and princes in their valour rushing upon death — of Tyrrhenian bands, and all Hesperia mustered in arms. Greater is the story that opens before me; greater is the task I essay.
[45] King Latinus, now old, ruled over lands and towns in the calm of a long peace. He, we are told, was sprung of Faunus and the Laurentine nymph, Marica. Faunus' sire was Picus, and he boasts thee, O Saturn, as his father; thou art first founder of the line. To him by Heaven's decree was no son or male descent, cut oft", as it was, in the spring of early youth. Alone, to preserve the house and noble home, was a daughter, now ripe for a husband, now of full age to be a bride. Many wooed her from wide Latium and all Ausonia, yet goodliest above all other wooers was Turnus, of long and lofty ancestry, whom the queen-mother yearned with wondrous passion to unite to her as son. But divine portents, with mani- fold alarms, bar the way. In the midst of the palace, in the high inner courts, stood a laurel of sacred leafage, preserved in awe through many years, which lord Latinus himself, 'twas said, found and dedicated to Phoebus, when he built his first towers; and from it he gave his settlers their name Laurentes. Atop of this tree, wondrous to tell, settled a dense swarm of bees, borne with loud humming across the liquid air, and with feet intertwined hung in sudden swarm from the leafy bough. Forthwith the prophet cries: "I see a stranger draw near; from the self-same quarter a troop seeks the same quarter, and reigns in the topmost citadel! " Moreover, while with hal- lowed torch he kindles the altars, and at her father's side stands the maiden Lavinia, she was seen (O hor- ror !) to catch fire in her long tresses, and burn with crackling flame in all her headgear, her queenly hair ablaze, ablaze her jewelled coronal; then wreathed in smoke and yellow glare, she scattered fire through- out the palace. That indeed was noised abroad as an awful and wondrous vision; for she, they foretold, would herself be glorious in fame and fortune, yet to her people she boded a mighty war.
[81] But the king, troubled by the portent, visits the oracle of Faunus, his prophetic sire, and consults the groves beneath high Albunea, which, mightiest of forests, echoes with hallowed fountain, and breathes forth from her darkness a deadly vapour. Hence the tribes of Italy and all the Oenotrian land seek responses in days of doubt; hither the priestess brings the offerings, and as she lies under the silent night on the outspread fleeces of slaughtered sheep and woos slumber, she sees many phantoms flitting in wondrous wise, hears voices manifold, holds converse with the gods, and speaks with Acheron in lowest Avernus. Here then, also. King Latinus himself, seeking an answer, duly slaughtered a hundred woolly sheep, and lay couched on their hides and outspread fleeces. Suddenly a voice came from the deep grove: "Seek not, O my son, to ally thy daughter in Latin wedlock, and put no faith in the bridal-chamber prepared. Strangers shall come, to be thy sons, whose blood shall exalt our name to the stars, and the children of whose race shall behold, where the circling sun looks on either ocean," the whole world roll obedient beneath their feet." This answer of his father Faunus, and the warning he gave in the silent night, Latinus keeps not shut within his own lips; but Rumour, flitting far and wide, had already borne the tidings through the Ausonian cities, when the sons of Laomedon moored their ships to the river's grassy bank.
[107] Aeneas, and his chief captains and fair Iulus lay their limbs to rest under the boughs of a high tree, and spread the feast; they place cakes of meal along the sward beneath the viandsJove himself inspired them — and they crown the wheaten base with fruits of the field. Here, haply, when the rest was consumed, and the scantness of fare drove them to turn their teeth upon the slender cakes — to profane with hand and daring jaw the fateful circles of crust, and spare not the broad loaves : " Ha I we eat our tables too!" quoth Iulus, jesting; this and no more. That cry,- v.hen heard, first brought an end of toil; and as it first fell from the speaker's lips, his father caught it up and held it fast, awe- struck at Heaven's will. Straightway, " Hail, O land," he cries, " destined as my due! and hail to you, ye faithful gods of Troy! Here is our home, here our country! For my father Anchises — now I recall it — bequeathed me this secret of fate: ' My son, when, wafted to an unknown shore, hunger shall compel thee, as food fails, to devour thy tables, then in thy weariness hope for a home, and there be mindful first to set up thy dwellings with thy hand and bank them with a mound.' This was that hun- ger foretold, this the last strait awaiting us, that should set an end to our deadly woes! Come then, and, gladly with the sun's first beams, let us explore what lands these are, what people here dwell, where is the city of the nation, and let us fare forth from the harbour in divers ways. Now pour your cups to Jove, and call in prayer on my sire Anchises, and set the wine again upon the board."
[135] So speaking, he straightway wreaths his temples with leafy bough and prays to the genius of the place, and Earth, first of gods; to the nymphs and the streams yet unknown; then to Night and Night's rising signs, and to Jove of Ida and the Phrygian Mother, each in order, and his twain parents, in heaven and in the world below. At this, the al- mighty Father thundered thrice aloft from a clear sky, and with his own hand shook forth to view from heaven a cloud ablaze with shafts of golden light. Then suddenly through the Trojan band runs the rumour, that the day has come to found their promised city. Emulously they renew the feast, and cheered by the mighty omen set on the bowls and wreathe the wine.
[148] On the morrow, soon as the risen day was lighting the earth with her earliest torch, by separate ways they search out the city and boundaries and coasts of the nation. This, they learn, is the pool of Numicius' fount; this the Tiber river; here dwell the brave Latins. Then Anchises' son commands a hundred envoys, chosen from every rank, to go to the king's stately city, o'er-shaded all by the boughs of Pallas, to bear gifts for the hero, and to crave peace for the Trojans. They linger not, but hasten at his bidding and move with rapid steps. Aeneas himself marks out his walls with a shallow trench, toils o'er the ground, and encircles this first settlement on the coast, after the fashion of a camp, with mound and battlements. And now his band had traversed their way; they were in sight of the towers and steep roofs of the Latins, and drew near to the wall. Before the city, boys and youths in their early bloom are a-training in horsemanship, or break in teams amid the dust, or bend eager bows, or hurl with their arms tough darts, and challenge to race or boxing bout — when, galloping up, a messenger brings word to the aged monarch's ears that mighty men arc come in unknov.n attire. The king bids them be summoned within the halls, and takes his seat in the midst on his ancestral throne.
[170] Stately and vast, towering with a hundred columns, his house crowned the city, once the palace of Laurentian Picus, awe-inspiring with its grove and the sanctity of olden days. Here 'twas auspicious for kings to receive the sceptre, and first uplift the fasces; this shrine was their senate-house, this the scene of their holy feasts; here, after slaughter of rams, the elders were wont to sit down at the long line of tables. Yea, and in order are images of their forefathers of yore, carved of old cedar — Italus and father Sabinus, planter of the vine, guarding in his image the curved pruning-hook, and aged Saturn, and the likeness of two-faced Janus — all standing in the vestibule; and other kings from the beginning, and they who had suffered wounds of war, fighting for their fatherland. Many arms, moreover, hang on the sacred doors, captive chariots, curved axes, helmet-crests and massive bars of gates; javelins and shields and beaks wrenched from ships. There sat one, holding the Quirinal staff and girt with short robe, his left hand bearing the sacred shield — even Picus, tamer of steeds, whom his bride Circe, smitten with love's longing, struck with her golden rod, and with drugs changed into a bird with plumes of dappled hue.
[192] Such was the temple of the gods wherein Latinus, seated on the throne of his fathers, summoned the Teucrians to his presence in the halls, and as they entered greeted them thus with gentle mien: "Tell, O Sons of Dardanus — for your city and race we knoAV, and not unheard of is your journey over the deep — what seek ye? What cause, or what need, hath borne you to the Ausonian shore o'er so many dark-blue waters? Whether straying from your course, or driven by storms (for such things oft do sailors suffer on the high seas), ye have entered the river banks and lie in liaven, shun not our welcome, and be not unaware that the Latins are Saturn's race, righteous not by bond or laws, but self-controlled of their own free will and by the custom of their ancient god. And in truth I re- member, though time has dimmed the tale, that Auruncan elders told how that in this land sprang Dardanus, and hence passed to the towns of Phrygian Ida and Thracian Samos, that men now call Samothrace. 'Twas hence, from the Tuscan home of Corythus, he came, and now the golden palace of the starry sky admits him to a throne, and with his altars he increases the number of the gods."
[212] He ceased, and Ilioneus followed thus: " O King, illustrious seed of Faunus, no black storm hath tossed us on the waves and driven us to seek shelter in your lands, nor hath star or shore misled us in our course. Of set purpose and with willing hearts do we draw near to this thy city, exiled from a realm once the greatest that the sun beheld as he journeyed from the uttermost heaven. From Jove- is the origin of our race; in Jove, as ancestor, the sons of Dardanus glory; of Jove's supreme race is our king himself, Trojan Aeneas, who has sent us to thy doors How fierce the storm that burst from cruel Mycenae and passed o'er the plains of Ida; how, driven by fate, the two worlds of Europe and Asia clashed — has come to the ears of all, whom the farthest land where Ocean is flung back keeps far away, and of all whom the zone of the tyrannous sun, stretched mid- most of the four, severs from us. From that deluge have we sailed o'er many waste seas, and now crave a scant home for our country's gods, a harmless landing-place, and air and water free to all. We shall be no shame to the realm, nor shall your renown be lightly told or the grace of such a deed grow faint, nor shall Ausonia repent of having welcomed Troy to her breast. By the fortunes of Aeneas I sweax", and by his strong right hand, whether in loyalty or in war and arms it has been proved, many are the peoples, many the nations — scorn us not, that of ourselves we proffer garlands with our hands and address to you words of suppliance — who have sought us for themselves and craved our alliance; but the will of heaven has forced us by its behests to seek out your shores. Hence was Dardanus sprung and hither he returns while with high decrees Apollo urges us to Tuscan Tiber and the sacred waters of the Numician spring. Further, to thee our king offers these poor tokens of his former for- tune — relics snatclied from burning Troy. Witli this gold did his father Anchises pour libation at the altars; this was Priam's array when after his wont he gave laws to the assembled nations — the sceptre, the sacred diadem, and the robes wrought by Ilium's daughters."
[249] At these words of Ilioneus Latinus holds his face fixed in steady gaze downward, rolling the while his earnest eyes. Nor is it so much that the embroidered purple or the sceptre of Priam moves the king, as that he broods o'er his daughter's wedlock and bridal bed, and revolves in his breast the oracle of ancient Faunus. "This," he thought, "must be he who, coming from a stranger's home, is pre- destined by the fates as my son, and called to sovereignty with equal power; hence must come the offspring, glorious in valour, whose might is to master all the world." At last, in gladness, he speaks: "May the gods prosper our intent and their own prophecy! Trojan, thy wish shall be granted; nor do I spurn thy gifts. While Latinus is king, ye shall not lack the bounty of a fruitful soil, nor Troy's abundance. Only let Aeneas, if so he longs for us, if he be eager to join us in amity and be called our ally, let him come in person and shrink not from friendly eyes. To me it shall be a term of the peace to have touched your sovereign's hand! Do ye now in turn take back to the king my answer: I have a daughter whom oracles from my father's shrine and countless prodigies from heaven suffer me not to unite to a bridegroom of our race; sons shall come from shores of strangers — such destiny, they foretell, awaits Latium — whose blood shall exalt our name to the stars. That this is he on whom fate calls, I both think, and, if my soul forebodes aught of truth, him I choose."
[274] With these words the old king picks out horses from all his number—three hundred stood sleek in their high stalls. At once for all the Teucrians in order he commands them to be led forth, fleet oj foot and caparisoned with purple and embroidered housings. Golden are the chains that hang drooping from their breasts, of gold are their trappings, and yellow gold they champ with their teeth. For the absent Aeneas he chooses a car and twin coursers of ethereal seed, breathing fire from their nostrils, and sprung from the stock of those steeds which cunning Circe, stealing them from her sire, bred bastard from the mare she had mated. With such words and gifts from Latinus, the sons of Aeneas, mounted on their horses, return carrying back peace.
[286] But lo! the fierce wife of Jove was faring back from Argos, city of Inachus, holding her airy flight; and from the sky afar, even from Sicilian Pachynus, she espied the rejoicing Aeneas and his Dardan fleet. She sees them already building a home, already trust- ing in the land, their ships deserted. She stopped, pierced with sharp grief; then, shaking her head, pours forth from her breast these words: "Ah! hated race, and Phrygian fates, that cross my own! Could they perish on the Sigean plains? Could they, cap- tured, suffer captivity .'' Did the fires of Troy consume them? Lo! through the midst of armies, through the midst of flames, they have found a way. But, me- thinks, my power at last lies outworn; or my wrath is sated, and I rest! Nay more, when they were hurled forth from their country, with my vengeance I dared to follow the exiles through the waves and confront them o'er all the deep: against the Teucrians has been spent all the power of sea and sky. Yet what have the Syrtes availed me, or Scylla, what yawning Charybdis? They find shelter in Tiber's longed-for channel careless of ocean and of me. Mars could destroy the Lapiths' giant race; the very father of the gods yielded ancient Calydon to Diana's wrath;  though for what heinous sin did Lapiths or Calydon merit such penalty? But I, Jove's mighty consort, who have endured, alas! to leave naught undared, who have turned me to every shift, I am worsted by Aeneas! But if my powers be not strong enough, surely I need not be slow to seek succour wherever it may be; if Heaven I can not bend, then Hell I will arouse! Not mine will it be— I grant it — to keep him from the crown of Latium, and by fate Lavinia abides immovably his bride; yet to put off the hour and to bring delay to such great issues — that may I do; yet may I uproot the nation of either king. At such price of their people's lives be father and son-in-law united! Blood of Trojan and Rutulian shall be thy dower, maiden, and Bellona awaits thee as thy bridal matron. Nor did Cisseus' daughter alone conceive a firebrand and give birth to nuptial flames.'- Nay, Venus has the like in her own child, a second Paris, another funeral torch for reborn Troy."
[323] These words uttered, she with awful mien passed to earth, and calls baleful Allecto from the home of the Dread Goddesses and the infernal shades — Allecto, whose heart is set on gloomy w-ars, pas- sions, plots and baneful crimes. Hateful is the mon- ster even to her sire Pluto, hateful to her Tartarean sisters; so many are the forms she assumes, so savage their aspect, so thick her black upsprouting vipers.' Her Juno inflames with these words, speaking thus: "Grant me, maiden daughter of Night, this service, a boon all my own, that my honour and glory yield not o'ermastered, that the sons of Aeneas be not able to cajole Latinus with wedlock or beset the borders of Italy. Thou canst arm for strife brothers of one soul, and overturn homes with hate; thou canst bring under the roof the lash and funeral torch; thou hast a thousand names, a thousand means of ill. Rouse thy fertile bosom, shatter the pact of peace, sow seeds of wicked war! In the same hour let the men crave, demand, and seize the sword! "
[341] Thereon Allecto, steeped in Gorgonian venom, first seeks Latium and the high halls of the Lauren- tine king, and sits down before the silent threshold of Amata, who, with a woman's distress, a woman's passion, was seething with frenzy over the Teucrian's coming and Turnus' marriage. On her the goddess flings a snake from her dusky tresses, and thrusts it into her bosom, into her inmost heart, that maddened by the pest she may embroil all the house. Gliding be- tween her raiment and smooth breasts, it winds its way unfelt, and, unseen by the frenzied woman, breathes into her its viperous breath. The huge snake becomes the collar of twisted gold about her neck, becomes the festoon of the long fillet, entwines itself into her hair, and slides smoothly over her limbs. And while first the taint, stealing on in fluent poison, thrills her senses and wraps her bones with fire, nor yet her soul has caught the flame throughout her breast, softly, and as mothers are wont, she spoke, shedding many a tear over her daughter's and the Phrygian's wedlock; "Is it to exiled Teucrians Lavinia is given as wife, O father? and hast thou no pity on thy daughter and thyself? no pity on her mother, whom with the first North wind the faithless pirate will desert, steering for the deep with a maid as booty? Or, was it not thus that the Phrygian shepherd  entered Lacedaemon and bore off Leda's Helen to Trojan towns? What of thy solemn pledge? What of thine old love for thine own, and the hand so oft pledged to Turnus, thy kin? If for Latins a son be sought of strangers' stock, and if that be fixed, and the com- mands of thy sire Faunus weigh upon thee, then I hold that every land, free and separate from our rule, is strange, and that such is the word of the gods. Turnus, too, if the first origin of his house be traced back, has ancestry in Inachus and Acrisius and mid- most Mycenae." 373 When, after such vain trial with words, she sees Latinus stand firm against her — when the serpent's maddening venom has glided deep into her veins and courses through her whole frame — then, indeed, the luckless queen, stung by monstrous horrors, in wild frenzy rages from end to end of the city. As at times a top, spinning under the twisted lash, which boys intent on the game drive in a great circle through an empty court — urged by the whip it speeds on round after round; the puzzled, childish throng hang over it in wonder, marvelling at the whirling box-wood; the blows give it life: so, with course no slacker, is she driven through the midst of cities and proud peoples. Nay, feigning the spirit of Bacchus, essaying a greater sin and launching a greater madness, forth she flies to the forest, and hides her daughter in the leafy mountains, thereby to rob the Teucrians of their marriage and delay the nuptial torch. " Evoe Bacchus! " she shrieks. " Thou alone," thus she shouts, "art worthy of the maiden! For thee, in truth, she takes up the waving thyrsus, to thee she pays honour in the dance, for thee she grows her sacred tresses." Fame flies abroad, and the matrons, their breasts kindled with fury, are driven on, all by the same frenzy, to seek new dwellings. They have left their homes, and bare neck and hair to the winds, while some fill the sky with tremulous shrieks and, clad in fawn-skins, cany vine-bound spears. Herself in the centre, the infuriate queen uplifts a blazing brand of pine and sings the marriage- song of her daughter and Turnus, rolling the while blood-shot eyes; then of a sudden she fiercely shouts: "Ho! mothers of Latium, give ear, where'er ye be! If in your loyal hearts still lives affection for unhappy Amata, if care for a mother's rights stings your souls, doff the fillets from your hair, join the revels with me! " Such is the queen, as amid woods, amid wild beasts' coverts, Allecto drives her far and wide with Bacchic goad.
[406] Soon as she deemed that she had whetted enough the first shafts of frenzy, and had upturned the purpose and all the palace of Latinus, forthwith the gloomy goddess flies hence on dusky wings to the walls of the bold Rutulian, the city which, Danae, they say, thither borne by the headlong South, built with her Acrisian settlers. The place was once called Ardea by our sires, and still stands Ardea, a mighty name, but its fortune is fled. Here, in his high palace, Turnus, at dead of night, was in the midst of slumbers. Allecto puts oiT her grim features and fiendish limbs, transforms herself to an old dame's face, furrows her loathly brow with wrinkles, assumes hoary locks and fillet, next en- twines them with an olive spray, and becomes Calybe, aged priestess of Juno's temple, then, with these words, presents herself to the young man's eyes: "Turnus, wilt thou brook all these toils poured forth in vain, and thy sceptre transferred to Dardan settlers? The king denies thee thy bride and the dower thy blood has won, and a stranger is sought as heir to thy throne. Go now, confront thankless perils, thou scorned one: go, lay low the Tuscan ranks; shield the Latins with peace. This it was that, in very presence, Saturn's almighty daughter bade me say to thee, as thou wert lying in the stillness of night. Rise then, and gladly make ready the arming of thy youth, and their march from the gates to battle. Consume the Phrygian chiefs, who are anchored in our fair stream, and burn their painted ships. The mighty power of the gods com- mands. Let King Latinus himself, unless he consent to give thee thy bride, and stand by his word, know of it, and at last make proof of Turnus as a foe."
[435] Hereon, the youth, mocking at the seer, thus in turn takes up the speech: " That a fleet has entered Tiber's waters, the tale has not, as thou deemest, escaped my ear — feign not for me such terrors — nor is Queen Juno unmindful of me. But thee, O mother, old age, enfeebled by decay and barren of truth, frets with vain distress, and amid the feuds of kings mocks thy prophetic soul with false alarms. Thy charge it is to keep the gods' images and temples; war and peace they shall wield, whose work war is."
[445] At such words Allecto blazed forth in fury. But even as the youth spoke, a sudden tremor seized his limbs, and his eyes were set in fear; so many are the Fury's hissing snakes, so monstrous the features that unfold themselves. Then, rolling her flaming eyes, she thrust him back, as he faltered and was fain to say more, reared two snakes from her tresses, sounded her whip, and spoke further with rabid lips: "Behold me, enfeebled by decay, whom old age, barren of truth, amid the feuds of kings, mocks with vain alarm! Look on this! I am come from the home of the Dread Sisters, and in my hand I bear war and death."
[456] So saying, she hurled at the youth a torch, and fixed in his breast the brand, smoking with lurid light. A monstrous terror broke his sleep, and the sweat, bursting forth from all his frame, drenched bone and limb. For arms he madly shrieks; arms he seeks in couch and chamber; lust of the sword rages in him, the accursed frenzy of war, and resentment crowning all: even as when flaming sticks, loud crackling, are heaped under the ribs of a billowing cauldron, and the waters dance with the heat; within seethes the liquid flood, steaming and bubbling up high with foam; and now the wave contains itself no longer, and the black smoke soars aloft. There- fore, profaning peace, he orders his chief warriors to march upon Latinus, and bids arms be made ready. "Defend Italy," he cries, " drive the foe from her bounds; I come, a match for both Teucrians and Latins." When thus he spake, and called the gods to hear his vows, the Rutuli vie in exhorting one another to arms. One is moved by the peerless beauty of his form and youth, one by his royal ancestry, another by the glorious deeds of his hand.
[475] While Turnus fills the Rutuli with daring courage, Allecto on Stygian wing speeds toward the Trojans, with new wiles spying out the place, where, on the shore, fair Iulus was hunting wild beasts with nets and steeds. Here the hellish maid flings upon his hounds a sudden frenzy, and touches their nostrils with the well-known scent, so that in hot haste they course a stag. This was the first source of ill; this first kindled the rustic spirit to war. There was a stag of wondrous beauty and mighty antlers, which, torn from the mother's breast, the sons of Tyrrhus nurtured, and Tyrrhus, their sire, controller of the royal herds, and charged with care of pastures near and far. Their sister Silvia had trained him to obey, and with constant love she adorned him, twining his horns with soft garlands, combing the wild thing's coat, and laving him in the crystal spring. He, patient of her hand, and accus- tomed to his master's board, roved the woods, and of his own accord betook himself home again to the well-known door, howe'er late the night.
[493] While far afield the stag was straying, the maddened hounds of the huntsman Iulus started him, as haply he floated down stream and cooled his heat on the grassy bank. Ascanius himself, too, fired with longing for chiefest honour, aimed a shaft from his bent bow, nor did the goddess fail his faltering hand; the reed sped with a loud whiz, and pierced belly and flank alike. But the wounded creature fled under the familiar roof, and moaning crept into his stall, where, bleeding and suppliant- like, he filled all the house with his plaints. First Silvia the sister, beating her arms with her hands, calls for help and summons the hardy country-folk. They — for the fell fiend lurks in the silent woods — came unlocked for, armed one with seared brand, one with heavy-knotted stick; what each can find in his quest, wrath makes a weapon. Tyrrhus sum- mons his bands, snatching up an axe and breathing savage rage, — for then by chance he was cleaving an oak in four with inward driven wedges.
[511] But the cruel goddess, espying from her watch- tower the moment of mischief, seeks the steep farm-roof, and from the topmost ridge sounds the shepherds' call, and on the twisted horn strains her hellish voice, whereat forthwith every grove trembled, and the woods echoed to their depths. It was heard by Trivia's lake afar, heard by Nar with his white sulphurous water, and by the springs of Velinus; and startled mothers clasped their children to their breasts. Then indeed, hurrying to the sound, wherewith the dread clarion gave the signal, the wild husbandmen snatch up their weapons and gather from all sides; no less the Trojan youth pour through the camp's open gates their succour for Ascanius. The lines are ranged: not now do they contend in rustic quarrel with heavy clubs or seared stakes, but with two-edged steel they try the issue; far and wide bristles a dark harvest of drawn swords, while brass shines at the challenge of the sun and flings its light to the clouds: as when a billow begins to whiten under the wind's first breath, little by little the sea swells and lifts its waves higher, till at last it rises to heaven from its lowest depths. Here in the front rank, young Almo, who had been eldest of Tyrrhus' sons, is laid low by a whistling arrow; for the wound was fixed beneath his throat, choking with blood the path of liquid speech and the slender breath. Around him lie many dead, and among them old Galaesus, slain as he throws himself between to plead for peace — he who was of all men most righteous and erstwhile wealthiest in Ausonia's fields; for him five flocks bleated, five herds came back from pasture, and a hundred ploughs upturned the soil.
[540] While thus o'er the plains they fight with doubtful issue, the goddess, her promise fulfilled, when once she has stained with blood and opened with death the first encounter, quits Hesperia, and turning away through the air of heaven, addresses Juno in haughty tones of triumph; " Lo, at thy will, discord is ripened into gloomy war. Bid them unite in friendship and join alliance, seeing that I have sprinkled the Teucrians with Ausonian blood. Moreover, this will I add, if I am assured of thy wish: with rumours I will draw bordering towns to battle, and will kindle their minds with lust of maddening war, that from all sides they may come to aid; I will sow the land with arms." Then Juno, in answer: " Enough of alarms and treachery; sure are the causes of war; man with man they fight in arms, and the arms that chance first brought, fresh blood now stains. Such be the alliance, such the bridal they solemnize — -this peerless son of Venus, and this great king Latin us! That thou shouldst roam too freely in the upper air, the mighty sire, sovereign of high Olympus, would not suffer. Give place; whatsoever may yet chance in the struggle, that I myself will sway." So spake Saturn's daughter; but the other raises her serpent- hissing pinions, and leaving the heights above, seeks her home in Cocytus. There is a place in the heart of Italy, beneath high hills, renowned and famed in many lands, the Vale of Ampsanctus. On either hand a forest's fringe, dark with dense leafage, hems it in, and in the centre a roaring torrent resounds o'er the rocks in swirling eddies. Here is shown an awful cavern, and a breathing-place of horrid Dis; and a vast gorge, whence Acheron bursts forth, opens its pestilential jaws. Herein the Fury hid lier loathed power, relieving earth and heaven.
[572] No less meanwhile does Saturn's royal daughter put a final hand to the war. From the battle-field there pours into the city the whole company of shepherds, bearing back the slain — the boy Almo, and Galaesus with mangled face — calling on the gods and adjuring Latinus. Turnus is there, and amid the outcry at the slaughter, and fire of passion, redoubles terror: " Teucrians are called to reign; a Phrygian stock mingles its taint; I am spurned from the door! " Then they, whose mothers, frenzied by Bacchus, tread the pathless woods in dancing bands (for of no light weight is Amata's name) draw together from every side, and importune the War- god. Straightway, one and all, despite the omens, despite the oracles of gods, with will perverse, clamour for unholy war. With emulous zeal they swarm round Latinus' palace. He, like an unmoved ocean-cliff, resists; like an ocean-cliff, which, when a great crash comes, stands steadfast in its bulk amid many howling waves; in vain the crags and foaming rocks roar about, and the sea-weed, dashed upon its sides, is whirled back. But when no power is given him to quell their blind resolve, and all goes as cruel Juno wills, then wit!» many an appeal to the gods and the voiceless skies, " Alas! " cries the father, " we are shattered by fate, and swept away by the storm! Ye yourselves, my wretched children, with your impious blood shall pay the price of this ' Thee Turnus, thee the guilt and its bitter punish- ment shall await, and too late with vows shalt thou adore the gods. For me, my rest is won, and my haven is full at hand; 'tis but of a happy death I am despoiled. " And saying no more he shut him- self in the palace, and let drop the reins of rule.
[601] A custom there was in Hesperian Latium, which thenceforth the Alban cities held holy, as now does Rome, mistress of the world, what time they first rouse the war-god to battle, be it Getae or Arabs or Hyrcanians against whom their hands prepare to carry tearful war, or to march on India's sons 2 and pursue the Dawn, and reclaim their stand- ards from the Parthian: — there are twin gates  of War (so men call them), hallowed by religious awe and the terrors of fierce Mars: a hundred brazen bolts close them, and the eternal strength of iron, and Janus their guardian never quits the threshold. Here, when the sentence of the Fathers is firmly fixed on war, the Consul, arrayed in Quirinal robe and Gabine cincture, with his own hand unbars the grating portals, with his own lips calls forth war; then the rest of the warriors take up the cry, and brazen horns blare out their hoarse accord. With such custom then, too, Latinus was bidden to pro- claim war on the sons of Aeneas, and to unclose the grim gates. But the father withheld his hand, shrank back from the hateful office, and buried him- self in blind darkness. Then the queen of the gods gliding from the sky, with her own hand dashed in the Hngering doors, and on their turning hinges Saturn's daughter burst open the iron-bound gates of war. All ablaze is Ausonia, erstwhile sluggish and unmoved. Some make ready to march o'er the plains afoot, some, on high steeds mounted, storm amid clouds of dust: all cry out for arms. Some with rich fat burnish shields smooth and javelins bright, and whet axes on the stone; they joy to bear the standards, and hear the trumpet call. Nay, five mighty cities set up anvils and forge new weapons — strong Atina and proud Tibur, Ardca and Crustumeri and turreted Antemnae. They hollow helms to guard the head, and weave the wicker- frame of shields; others beat out breastplates of bronze, or polished greaves from pliant silver. To this is come all pride in share and sickle, all passion for the plough; they retemper in the furnace their fathers' swords. And now the clarion sounds; the password goes forth, the sign for war. One in wild haste snatches a helm from his home; another couples his snorting steeds to the yoke, dons his shield and coat of mail, triple-linked with gold, and girds on his trusty sword.
[641] Now fling wide Helicon, ye goddesses, and wake your song — what kings were roused to war, what hosts, in the train of each, filled the plains, with what manhood even then kindly Italy bloomed, with what arms she was aglow; for ye, divine ones, remember, and can recount; to us scarcely is wafted some scant breath of fame.
[647] First, from Tuscan coasts, fierce Mezentius, scorner of the gods, enters the war and arms his array. At his side, goodliest of form save Laurentine Turnus, is his son Lausus, — Lausus, tamer of steeds and vanquisher of beasts. From Agylla's town he leads a thousand men, that followed him in vain; one worthy to be happier in a father's rule, and to have other than Mezentius for sire!
[655] Next to these, Aventinus, beauteous son of beauteous Hercules, displays on the sward his palm- crowned chariot and victorious steeds, and on his shield bears his father's device — a hundred snakes and the Hydra, girt with serpents. Him, in the wood of the Aventine hill, Rhea the priestess brought in secret birth up into the borders of light — a woman mated with a god — when the Tirynthian victor, having slain Geryon, reached the Laurentian fields and bathed his Iberian kine in the Tuscan stream. In their hands the men carry to battle javelins and grim pikes, and fight with the tapering sword and Sabellian dart. Himself, he went on foot, swinging a huge lion's skin, unkempt with terrifying mane, its white teeth crowning his head; in such guise he entered the royal halls, shaggy-rough, his shoulders enveloped in the garb of Hercules.
[670] Next twin brethren leave the walls of Tibur, and the folk called from the name of their brother Tiburtus — Catillus and brave Coras, Argive youths. On they come in the front ranks amid the thronging spears, as when two cloud-born Centaurs descend from a mountain's high peak, leaving Homole or snowy Othrys in swift course; the mighty forest yields place as they go, and the thickets give way with loud crash.
[678] Nor was the founder of Praeneste's city absent, — Caeculus, the king who, as every age has believed, was born to Vulcan among the rural herds, and found upon the hearth. Him. in loose array, a rustic legion attends: they who dwell in steep Praeneste, and the fields of Gabine Juno, by the cold Anio and the Herniean rocks with their dewy streams; they whom rich Anagnia nurtures, and thou, father Amasenus. Not all of these have armour, or shields, or sounding chariots. The most part shower bullets of livid lead; part wield in the hand two darts, and have for head-gear tawny caps of wolf-skin. Bare is the left foot as they plant their steps; a boot of raw'- hide shields the other.
[691] But Messapus, tamer of horses, the seed of Neptune, whom none may lay low with fire or steel, suddenly calls to arms tribes long inert and bands unused to war, and again grasps the Sword. These hold the ranks of Fescennium and of Aequi Falisci; these Soracte's heights and Flavinian fields, Ciminus' lake and hill and the groves of Capena. In measured time they marched and sang their king: as ofttimes snowy swans amid the moist clouds, when they return from feeding, and from their long throats utter their tuneful strains; afar the river echoes, and the smitten Asian mead.' Nor would one think that mail-clad ranks were massed in that vast array, but that high in air, a cloud of hoarse-voiced birds was pressing shoreward from the deep gulf.
[706] Lo! Clausus,- of the ancient Sabine blood, lead- ing a mighty host, and equal to a mighty host himself; from whom now is spread through Latium the Claudian tribe and clan since Rome was shared with the Sabines. With him came Amiternum's vast cohort, and the ancient Quirites, the whole band of Eretum and olive-bearing Mutusca; they who dwell in Nomentum's city and the Rosean country by Velinus, on Tetrica's rugged crags and Mount Severus, in Casperia and Foruli, and by Himella's stream; they who drink of Tiber and Fabaris, they whom cold Nursia sent, the Ortine squadrons, the Latin peoples, and they whom Allia, ill-boding name, severs with its flood; as many as the waves that roll on the Libyan main, when fierce Orion sinks in the wintry waves; or thick as the corn-ears that are scorched by the early sun in the plain of Hermus or the yellow fields of Lycia. The bucklers clang, and the earth trembles under the tramping feet.
[723] Next, Agamemnon's son, foe of the Trojan name, Halaesus, yokes his steeds to the car, and in Turnus' cause sweeps along a thousand warlike tribes, men who turn with mattocks the wine-rich Massic lands; whom Auruncan sires sent from their high hills, and the Sidicine plains hard by; those who leave Cales, and the dweller by Volturnus' shallow river, and by their side the rough Saticulan and the Oscan bands. Shapely javelins are their weapons, but these it is their wont to fit with a pliant thong. A targe shields their left side; for close combat are their curved swords. 733 Nor shalt thou, Oebalus, pass unhonoured in our songs — thou whom, 'tis said, the nymph Sebelhis bare to Telon, when he reigned o'er Teleboan Capreae, now stricken in years; but, not content with his ancestral fields, his son even then held in his sway far and wide the Sarrastian tribes, and the plains watered by Sarnus, those who dwell in Rufrae and Batulum and Celemna's fields, and those on whom look down the battlements of Abella, rich in apples. In Teuton fashion these were wont to hurl their darts; their head-gear was bark stripped from the cork-tree; bronze flashes on their shields, flashes with bronze their sword.
[744] Thee, too, Ufens, mountainous Nersae sent forth to battle, of noble fame and success in arms — whose clan, on the rough Aequian clods, was rugged above all others, and inured to hard hunting in the woods. In arms they till the earth, and 'tis ever their joy to bear away fresh booty, and to live on plunder.
[750] Yea, and from the Marruvian race, sent by King Archippus, there came a priest, his helm decked with leaves of the fruitful olive, most valiant Umbro, who with charm and touch was wont to shed slumber on the viperous brood and water- snakes of baneful breath, soothing their wrath and curing their bites by his skill.  Yet he availed not to heal the stroke of the Dardan spear-point, nor against wounds did slumbrous charms aid him, or herbs culled on Marsian hills. Thee Angitia's grove wept, thee Fucinus' glassy wave, thee the limpid lakes!
[761] Likewise went to war Ilippolytus* son, Virbius, most fair, whom his mother Aricia sent forth in his glory. In Egeria's groves was he reared round the marshy shores, where stands Diana's altar, rich and gracious. For they tell how that Hippolytus, when he fell by his stepdame's craft, and slaked a sire's vengeance in blood, torn asunder by frightened steeds — came again to the starry firmament and heaven's upper air, recalled by the Healer's herbs and Diana's love. Then the Father omnipotent, wroth that any mortal should rise from the nether shades to the light of life, himself with his thunder hurled down to the Stygian waters the finder of such healing-craft, the Phoebus-born. But Trivia, kindly goddess, hides Hippolytus in a secret dwell- ing, and sends him away to the nymph Egeria and her grove, that there alone, amid Italian woods, he might live out his inglorious days, and take the altered name of Virbius. Hence, too, hoofed horses are kept far from Trivia's temple and hallowed groves, for that they, affrighted by ocean-monsters, strewed chariot and youth along the shore. None the less, his son was driving his fiery steeds on the level plain, and speeding charioted to war.
[783] Himself too, amid the foremost, moves Tumus, of wondrous frame, holding sword in hand, and by a whole head o'ertopping all. His lofty helmet, crested with triple plume, upbears a Chimaera, breathing from her jaws Aetnean fires, lo! raging the more, and the madder with baleful flames, the more blood is outpoured and the fiercer waxes the fight. But, on his polished shield, lo with uplifted horns was emblazoned in gold, — lo, wondrous device, already o'ergrown with bristles, already a heifer, — and Argus the maiden's warder, and father Inachus pouring his stream from an embossed urn. Behind him comes a cloud of infantry, and shielded columns throng all the plain, Argive manhood and Auruncan bands, Rutulians and old Sicanians, the Sacranian lines and Labicians with painted bucklers; they who till thy glades, O Tiber, and Numicius' sacred shore, whose ploughshare moves the Rutulian hills and Circe's ridge '; o'er whose fields Jupiter of Anxur reigns, and Feronia rejoicing in her greenwood; where lies Satura's black marsh, and cold Ufens winds his way through the valley-depths and sinks into the sea.
