[873] And now thrice in loud tones he called Aeneas. Yea, and Aeneas knew the call, and offers joyful prayer: "So may the great father of the gods grant it, so Apollo on high! Mayest thou begin the com- bat! " So much said, he moves on to meet him with levelled spear. But he: "Why seek to affright me, fierce foe, now my son is taken? This was the one way whereby thou couldst destroy me. We shrink not from death, nor heed we any of the gods. Cease; for I come to die, first bringing thee these gifts." He spoke, and hurled a javelin at his foe; then plants another and yet another, wheeling in wide circle; but the boss of gold withstands all. Thrice round his watchful foe he rode, turning to the left and launching darts from his hand; thrice the Trojan hero bears round with him the vast forest of spears upon his brazen shield. Then, weary of prolonging so many delays, of plucking out so many darts, and hard pressed in the unequal fray, at last with much pondering in heart, he springs forth and hurls his lance full between the war-horse's hollow temples. The steed rears up, lashes the air with its feet, then throws the rider and itself coming down above, entangles him; then falls over him in headlong plunge, and with shoulder out of joint. With their cries Trojans and Latins set heaven aflame. Up flies Aeneas, plucks his sword from the scabbard, and thus above him cries: " Where now is bold Mezentius, and that wild fierceness of soul?" To him the Tuscan, as with eyes upturned to the air he drank in the heaven and regained his sense: " Bitter foe. why thy taunts and threats of death? No sin is there in slaying me; not on such terms came I to battle, nor is such the pact my Lausus pledged between me and thee. This alone I ask, by what- soever grace a vanquished foe may claim: suffer my body to be laid in earth. I know that my people's fierce hatred besets me. Guard me, I pray, from their Any, and grant me fellowship with my son within the tomb." So speaks he, and, unfaltering, welcomes the sword to his throat, and pours forth his life over his armour in streams of blood. [1] Meanwhile dawn rose and left the ocean. Aeneas, though his sorrows urge to give time for his com- rades' burial, and death has bewildered his soul, yet as the Day-star rose, began to pay the gods his vows of victory. A mighty oak, its branches lopped all about, he plants on a mound, and arrays in the gleaming amis stripped from Mezentius the chief, a trophy to thee, thou Lord of War. Thereto he fastens the crests dripping with blood, the soldier's broken darts, and the breastplate smitten and pierced twice six times; to the left hand he binds the brazen shield, and from the neck hangs the ivory sword. Then his triumphant comrades — for the whole band of chieftains thronged close about him — he thus begins to exhort:
[14] Mighty deeds have we wrought, my men; for what remains, away with all fear! These are the spoils and first fruits of a haughty king; and here is Mezentius, as fashioned by my hands. Now lies our march to Latium's king and walls. Prepare your weapons with courage and with your hopes anticipate the war; so that, soon as the gods above grant us to pluck hence our standards, and from the camp to lead forth the host, no delay may impede us unawares or faltering purpose retard us through fear. Meanwhile let us commit to earth the unburied bodies of our comrades — sole honour theirs in nether Acheron. Go," he said, " grace with the last rites those noble souls, who with their blood have won for us this our country; and first let Pallas be sent to Evander's mourning city, he whom, lacking naught of valour, the black day swept off and plunged in bitter death."
[29] So he speaks weeping, and retraces his steps to the threshold, where Pallas' lifeless body was laid, watched by old Acoetes, who erstwhile was armour- bearer to Parrhasian Evander, but now with less happy auspices went as appointed guardian to his loved foster-child. Around stood all the attendant train and Trojan throng, with the Ilian women, their hair unloosed for mourning in wonted wise. But when Aeneas entered the lofty portal, they smote their breasts and raised a mighty wail to the stars, and the royal dwelling rang with their sorrowful lamentation. He, when he saw the pillowed head and face of Pallas, snowy-white, and, on his smooth breast, the gaping wound from Ausonian spear, thus speaks, amid upwelling tears: "Was it thou, unhappy boy, that Fortune grudged me in her happy hour, that thou mightest not look upon my realm, nor ride triumphant to thy father's home r Not such the parting promise touching thee I gave thy sire Evander, when he embraced me as I went, and sent me forth to win great empire, yet warned me in fear that valiant were the men and hardy the race we confronted. And now he, much beguiled by idle hope, perchance is offering vows and heaping the altars high with gifts; we, in sorrow, attend with bootless rites the lifeless sou, who no more owes aught to any gods of heaven. Unhappy I thou wilt behold the bitter funeral of thy son! Is this our return, our awaited triumph? Is this my sure pledge? Yet shall not thine eyes, Evander, look on one routed with shameful wounds nor shalt thou, his father, pray for a death accursed, because thy son is saved. Ah me! how great a protection is lost to thee, Ausonia, how great to thee, Iulus! "
[59] His lamentation ended, he bids them raise the piteous corpse, and sends a thousand men chosen from his whole host to attend the last rite and share the father's tears — scant solace for grief so vast, but due to a father's sorrow. Others in haste plait the wicker-frame of a soft bier with arbute shoots and oaken twigs, and shroud the high-piled couch with leafy canopy. Here they lay the youth aloft on his rustic bed, like to a flower culled by maiden's finger, be it of tender violet or drooping hyacinth, whose sheen and native grace not yet have faded, but no more does its mother earth give strength and nurture. Then Aeneas brought forth two robes, stiff with gold and purple, which Sidonian Dido, delighting in the toil, had once herself with her own hands wrought for him, interweaving the web with threads of gold. Of these he sadly drapes one round the youth as a last honour, and in its covering veils those locks the fire shall claim; withal heaps up many a prize from the Laurentine fray ,2 and bids the spoils be borne in long train; then adds the steeds and arms of which he had stripped the foe. The victims' hands he had bound behind their backs, even to send them as offerings to the Shades, sprinkling the flames with the blood of the slain. He bids the chiefs them- selves bear tree-trunks clad in hostile arms, with foemen's names affixed. Hapless Acoetes, outworn with years, is led along, marring now his breast with clenched fists, now his face with nails, and anon he flings his whole frame prone upon the earth. Cars likewise they lead, bespattered with Rutulian blood. Behind, the war-steed Aethon, his trappings laid aside, goes weeping, and big drops wet his face. Others carry the spear and helmet: for all else Turnus, as victor, holds. Then follows a mournful host — the Teucrians, and all the Tuscans and the Arcadians with arms reversed. When all the retinue of his comrades had advanced far ahead, Aeneas halted, and with deep sigh spake this word more: "Me the same grim destiny of war summons hence to other tears: hail thou for evermore, noblest Pallas, and for evermore farewell! " And without further words he turned to the lofty walls and bent his steps towards the camp.
[100] And now came envoys from the Latin city, o'er- shaded with olive boughs and craving grace; the bodies that lay strewn by the sword o'er the plain they prayed him to restore and suffer to rest beneath an earthen mound. No war, they plead, is waged with vanquished men, bereft of air of heaven; let him spare men once called hosts, and fathers of their brides! 2 To them good Aeneas courteously grants the prayer he could not spurn, and adds these words besides: " What spiteful chance, ye Latins, has en- tangled you in so terrible a war, that ye fly from us your friends? Do ye ask me peace for the dead slain by the lot of battle? Gladly would I grant it to the living too. Nor had I come, had not fate assigned me here a place and home, nor wage I war with your people: it is your king who forsook our alliance and preferred to trust himself to Turnus' sword. Fairer it had been for Turnus to face this death. If he seeks to end the war by the strong hand, if he seeks to drive out the Trojans, with me he should have contended with these weapons: that one of us should have lived, to whom heaven or his own right hand had granted life. Now go, and kindle the fire beneath your hapless countrymen." Aeneas ceased: they stood dumb in silence, and kept their eyes and faces turned on one another.
[122] Then aged Drances, ever the foe of youthful Turnus in hate and calumny, thus speaks in reply: "O great in glory, greater in arms, thou hero of Troy, how with my praises may I extol thee to the sky? Am I to marvel first at thy justice or at thy toils in war? V/e indeed will gratefully bear these words back to our native city, and, if fortune grant a way, will unite thee with Latinus our king. Let Turnus seek alliances for himself! Nay, it will be our delight to rear those massive walls thy destiny ordains, and on our shoulders to bear the stones of Troy." He ceased, and all with one voice murmured assent. For twice six days they made truce, and, with peace interposing, Teucrians and Latins o'er the forest heights roamed scatheless together. The lofty ash rings under the two-edged axe; they lay low star-towering pines, and ceaselessly their wedges cleave oak and fragrant cedar, and groaning wains convey the mountain-ash.
[139] And now winged Fame, harbinger of that heavy grief, fills Evander's ears, Evander's house and city — Fame, that but now proclaimed Pallas victorious in Latium. The Arcadians streamed to the gates, and after their ancient wont, seized funeral torches; the road gleams with the long line of flame, and parts the fields afar. The Phrygian band, moving to meet them, joins the wailing throng. Soon as the matrons saw them draw near their homes, their shrieks set the mourning city ablaze. But no force can withhold Evander; he rushes into the midst, and, when the bier is set down, casts himself upon Pallas, and clings to him weeping and moaning, and scarce from sorrow at the last does his speech find open way: " Not such, O Pallas, v.as the promise thou hadst given thy sire, that thou wouldst seek more warily to en- trust thyself to cruel Mars! Well knew I how strong was the fresh glory of arms and the oversweet pride of battle's first day! O bitter first fruits of thy youth! O cruel schooling in close-neighbouring war! O vows, O prayers of mine, to which no god gave ear! And thou, my blessed spouse,' happy in thy death, and spared not for this grief! But I, living on, have overcome my destiny, only to linger thus — thy father! Would I had followed Troy's allied arms, to be overwhelmed by Rutulian darts! Would I had given my own life, and this funeral-pomp were bringing me — not Pallas — home! Yet I would not blame you, ye Trojans, nor our covenant, nor the hands we clasped in friendship: this lot was due to nay gray hairs. But if untimely death awaited my son, it shall be my joy that, after slaying his Volscian thousands, he fell leading the Trojans into Latium! Nay, Pallas, I myself could deem thee worthy of no other death than good Aeneas does, than the mighty Phrygians, than the Tyrrhene captains, and all the Tyrrhenian host. Great are the trophies they bring, to whom thy hand deals death;  thou, too, Turnus, wouldst now be standing, a monstrous trunk arrayed in arms, had thine age and strength of years been as his! But why do I, unhappy, stay the Teucrian? from conflict? Go, and forget not to bear this message to your king: that I drag on a life hateful now that Pallas is slain, the cause is thy right hand, which thou seest owes Turnus to son and to sire. That sole field is left thee for thy merits and thy fortune. I ask not for joy in life — that cannot be — but to bear tidings to my son in the shades below."
[182] Meanwhile Dawn had uplifted her kindly light for weary men, recalling them to task and toil. Now father Aeneas, now Tarchon, had set up pyres on the winding shore. Hither, after the fashion of their fathers, they each brought the bodies of their kin, and as the murky fires are lit beneath, high heaven is veiled in the gloom of darkness. Thrice, girt in glittering armour, they ran their course round the blazing piles; thrice circled on their steeds the mournful funeral-fire, and uttered the voice of wail- ing. Tears stream on earth, and stream on armour; cries of men and blare of clarions mount to heaven. And now some fling on the fire Latin spoils stripped from the slain, helmets and goodly swords, bridles and glowing wheels; others, offerings familiar to the dead — their own shields and luckless weapons. Around, many a stout ox is sacrificed to Death; bristly swine and cattle harried from all the country are slaughtered over the flames. Then, over all the shore, they watch their comrades burning, and keep guard above the charred pyres, nor can tear them- selves away till dewy night rolls round the heaven, inset with gleaming stars.
[203] Nor less, elsewhere, the hapless Latins built pyres innumerable. Of their many slain, some they bury in the earth, some they raise and carry to the neighbouring fields or send home to the city; the rest, a mighty mass of indistinguishable slaughter, they burn unreckoned and unhonoured: then on all sides, emulous with close-clustering fires, flare the broad fields. The third morn had withdrawn chill shade from heaven; mournfully they stirred from the pyres the bones mingled with deep ashes, and heaped above them a warm mound of earth. But within the walls, in the city of rich Latinus, is the chief uproar and the long wail's largest portion. Here mothers and their sons' unhappy brides, here the loving hearts of sorrowing sisters, and boys bereft of sires, call curses on the fell war and on Turnus' nuptials: " He, he himself," they cry, " should decide the issue by arms and the sword, he who claims for himself the realm of Italy and foremost honours." Fierce Drances weights the scale, and bears witness that Turnus alone is called, alone is summoned to battle. Over against them, the while, many an opinion in varied phrase speaks for Turnus, the shadow of the queen's great name is his shelter, and many a tale with well-won trophies upholds the hero.
[225] Amid this stir, at the fiery turmoil's height, lo! to crown all, from Diomede's great city the envoys bring a gloomy answer: naught has been gained at cost of so much toil; naught have gifts of gold or strong prayers availed; Latium must seek other arms or sue for peace to the Trojan king. Beneath his weight of grief even king Latinus sinks. That Aeneas is called of fate, guided by heaven's clear will, is the warning given by angry gods and the fresh graves before his eyes. Therefore his high council, the foremost of his people, he summons by royal command and convenes within his lofty portals. They assembled, streaming to the king's palace through the crowded streets. In their midst, eldest in years and first in regal state, with little joy upon his brow, sits Latinus, and now bids the envoys, returned from the Aetolian city, tell what tidings they bring back, and demands full answers, each in order. I'hen on all tongues fell silence, and, obedient to his word, Venulus thus begins:
[243] "We have seen, O citizens, Diomede and his Argive camp; we have achieved our journey, over- come all perils, and grasped the hand whereby the land of Ilium fell. He was founding his city of Argyripa, named after his father's race, in the con- quered fields of Iapygian Garganus. Soon as we entered, and liberty was given to speak before his face, we proffer our gifts, and declare our name and country, who are its invaders, and what cause has led us to Arpi, He heard and thus replied with unruffled mien:
[252] "'O happy peoples of Saturn's realm, sons of old Ausonia, what chance vexes your calm and lures you to provoke warfare unknown? All we who with steel profaned the fields of Troy — I speak not of the sorrows we suffered in war beneath her lofty walls of the heroes whom yonder Simois o'erwhelms — we, the wide world over, have paid all manner of penalties for guilt in nameless tortures, a band that even Priam might pity: witness Minerva's baleful star, the Euboic cliffs, and avenging Caphereus. From that warfare driven to diverse shores, Menelaus, son of Atreus, is in exile far as the pillars of Proteus; and Ulysses has looked on the Cyclopes of Aetna. Shall I tell of the realm of Neoptolemus and the home of Idomeneus o'erthrown! or of the Locrians who dwell on Libya's shore? Even the Mycenaean, the mighty Achaeans' chief, scarce within the threshold, fell by his wicked wife's hand; behind vanquished Asia lurked a paramour! 2 Ah! that heaven hath begrudged me return to my country's altars, and sight of the wife I long for, and lovely Calydon! Even now, portents of dreadful view pursue me; my lost comrades have winged their way to the sky or haunt the streams as birds — alas ' the dire punishment of my people! — and fill the cliffs with their tearful cries. Such, even such, was the fate I had to look for from that hour when with the steel I madly assailed celestial limbs, and profaned the hand of Venus with a wound.* Nay, nay, urge me not to such battles! Neither have I any war with Teucer's race since Troy's towers fell, nor have I joyful remembrance of the ills of old. The gifts that ye bring me from your country's bounds take rather to Aeneas. We have faced his fierce weapons, and fought him hand to hand: trust one who proved it, how huge he looms above his shield, with what whirlwind he hurls his spear! Had Ida's land borne two others like to him, the Trojans had even stormed the towns of Inachus, and Greece would be mourning, with doom reversed. In all our tarrying before the walls of stubborn Troy, it was by the hand of Hector and Aeneas that the Greeks' victory was halted and withdrew its advent till the tenth year. Both were renowned for courage, both eminent in arms; Aeneas was first in piety. Join hand to hand in treaty, as best ye may; but beware your swords clash not with his!' Thou hast heard, noble King, what the King replies, and what lie counsels on this mighty war."
[296] Scarce thus the envoys, when a various murmur ran along the troubled lips of Ausonia's sons: even as, when rocks delay a rushing river, there rises a roar from the pent-up flood, and the neighbouring banks echo to the plashing waters. Soon as minds were calmed and restless tongues were hushed, the king, first calling on heaven, from his high throne begins:
[302] "That ere now, O Latins, we had determined on our country's weal, I both could wish and it had been better; not to convene a council at such an hour, when the foe is seated at our walls. A war unblest, O my countrymen, we are waging with a race divine, with men unconquered; no battles weary them and even in defeat they cannot let go the sword. If ye had any hope in alliance with Aetolian arms, resign it. Each is his own hope; but how slender this is, ye see. All else, with what wide ruin it lies smitten, is before your eyes and within your grasp. Nor blame 1 any; what valour's utmost could do is done; with our realm's whole strength have we striven. Now mark: the judgment of my wavering mind I will unfold, and, if ye pay heed, will instruct you in brief. There is an ancient do- main of mine bordering the Tuscan river, stretching far westward, even beyond Sicanian bounds. Auruncans and Rutulians sow the seed, work the stubborn hills with the share, and graze their roughest slopes. Let ail this tract, witli a pine-clad belt of mountain height, pass to the Trojans in friendship; let us name just terms of treaty, and invite them to share our realm. Let them settle, if so strong be their desire, and build their city. But if they have a mind to lay hold of other bounds, and another nation, and are free to quit our soil, let us build twice ten ships of Italian oak; or if they can man more, all the timber lies at the water's edge; themselves shall prescribe the number and fashion of their vessels; we will give brass, labour, and docks. Further, to bear our word and seal the pact, I would have a hundred envoys go forth, Latins of noblest birth, proffering in their hands boughs of peace, and carrying gifts — talent-weights of gold and ivory, and the chair and robe, ensigns of our royalty. Take counsel for the commonweal, and uphold our weary fortunes! "
[330] Then Drances, hostile as before, whom the renown of Turnus goaded with the bitter stings of furtive envy, lavish of wealth and valiant of tongue, though his hand was cold for battle, in counsel deemed no mean adviser, in faction strong (his mother's high birth ennobled his lineage; from his sire obscure rank he drew), rises and with these words loads and heaps high their wrath:
[343] "A subject dark to no one and needing no voice of ours, O gracious king, is that whereon thou takest our counsel! All confess they know what course the public fortune prompts, but they shrink from speech. Let him grant liberty of speech and abate his blustering pride, through whose disastrous auspices and perverse ways (yea I will speak, though with arms and death he threaten me) we see so many glorious leaders have fallen and the whole city is sunk in mourning, while he, confident in flight, assails the Trojan camp and affrights heaven with his arms. One more add to those many gifts thou bidst us send and promise to the sons of Dardanus — one more, most gracious king — and let no man's violence prevail to stay thee from giving thy daughter, as a father may, to a peerless son in worthy nuptials, and making this bond of peace in eternal covenant. But if such terror possess our minds and hearts, let us entreat the prince himself and implore him, even him, of his grace, to yield and give up his own rights to king and country. Why fling thy hapless fellow-citizens so oft into gaping perils, O spring and source to Latium of these her woes .'' No safety is there in war; for peace we pray thee, Turnus, one and all, and, along with peace, for its one inviolable pledge. I first, I whom thou feignest to be thy foe — but that I waive — lo, I come in suppliance! Pity thine own folk; doff thy pride; and, beaten, give way! Routed, we have seen enough of death and have made wide lands desolate. Or, if glory stir thee, if in thy heart thou nurscst such strength, or if the dower of a palace be to thee so dear — be bold, and fearlessly advance thy breast to meet the foe. What! that Turnus may be blessed with a royal bride, are we, forsooth, we worthless lives, a crowd unburied and unwept, to be strewn upon the plains? Do thou also, if any might be thine, if thou hast aught of the War-god of thy sires, look him in the face who challenges! "
[376] At these words out blazed the fury of Turnus: he heaves a groan, and from his bosom's depth breaks forth with this cry: " Plenteous indeed, Drances, ever is thy stream of speech in the hour when battle calls for hands; and when the senate is summoned, thou art first to appear I But we need not to fill the council-house with words — those big words that fly securely from thy lips, while rampart-walls keep off the foe, and the trenches swim not yet with blood. Go, thunder on in eloquence — thy wonted way — and do thou, Drances, charge me with fear, since thy hand hath reared such slaughter-heapS of Teucrians, and everywhere thou adornest the fields with trophies. What living valour may achieve, 'tis in thy power to make trial; nor in sooth are our foes far to seek; on every side they beset our walls. Shall we move to meet them.'' Why lingerest? Will thy prowess lodge for ever in that windy tongue, and in those flying feet .'' I beaten? Or shall any one, foul liar, justly brand me beaten, that shall see swollen Tiber rise high with Ilian blood, and all Evander's house and line laid prostrate, and his Arcadians stripped of arms? Not such did Bitias and giant Pandarus prove me, nor those thousand men whom in one day my conquering arm sent down to hell, cooped though I was within their walls and girt by foemen's ramparts. No safety in war! Chant such bodings, fool, for the Dardan's head and thine own lot! Go on; cease not to confound all with thy great alarms, extol the might of a twice-conquered people, and in turn decry the arms of Latinus. Now the Myrmidon princes tremble before Phrygian arms, now Tydeus' son and Achilles of Larissa, and Aufidus' stream recoils from the Adriatic wave. Or listen when he feigns himself affrighted at my chiding — a knavish villainy — and sharpens calumny with terror! Never shalt thou lose such life as thine — be not troubled — by this right hand: let it dwell with thee, and abide in thy craven breast! Now, sire, I return to thee and this weighty debate of thine. If thou restest no further hope in our arms, if so forlorn are we, and in one repulse of our lines have fallen on utter ruin, nor can Fortune retrace her steps, let us pray for peace and stretch forth helpless hands! Yet, oh, if we had aught of our wonted valour! Blest beyond others in his toil, and peerless in soul would I hold the man, who, to shun such a sight, has fallen in death and once for all has bitten the dust. But if we still have means, a manhood still unharmed, cities and nations of Italy still supporting us; but if even the Trojans have won glory at much bloodshed's cost (they too have their deaths, and the storm swept over all alike) — why faint we ignobly upon the threshold's edge? Why, ere the trumpet sounds, does trembling seize our limbs? Many an ill has time repaired, and the shifting toil of changing years; many a man has Fortune, fitful visitant, mocked, then once more set up upon firm ground. No aid to us will be the Aetolian and his Arpi: yet Messapus will be, and Tolumnius the fortunate, and all the leaders sent by many a nation; nor will scant fame attend the flower of Latium and the Laurentine land. We have Camilla too, of the glorious Volscian race, leading her troop of horse and squadrons gay with brass. But if I alone am called by the Teucrians to combat, and such is your will, and I thus thwart the common good, Victory has not shrunk from these my hands with such loathing, that for hope so high I should decline to venture aught. I will face him boldly, even though he match the great Achilles and don like armour, wrought by Vulcan's hands. To you and my bride's sire, Latinus, have I, Turnus, second in valour to none of my fathers, devoted this life. Aeneas calls on him alone. So let him call, I pray! nor let Drances in my stead, if heaven's wrath be here, appease it by his death; nor, if here be prowess and glory, let him win the palm! "
[445] Thus, in mutual strife, were they debating doubtful issues: Aeneas the while moved from camp to field. Lo, amid wild uproar, a messenger rushes through the royal halls and fills the city with great alarms: in battle-array, he cries, the Teucrians and the Tyrrhene force are sweeping down from the Tiber river over all the plain. Straightway the minds of the people are confounded, their bosoms shaken, and their passions roused by no gentle spur. With wildly waving hands they call for arms; "arms!" the young men shout; the weeping fathers moan and mutter. And now, from every side, there rises to heaven a loud din with varied discord: even as when flocks of birds haply settle in some tall grove, or when, by Padusa's fish-filled stream, hoarse-throated swans scream among the clamorous pools. " Nay, citizens,' cries Turnus, seizing the moment, "convene a council, and sit praising peace; yonder they rush upon the realm in arms." No more he spake, but up he sprang, and sped swiftly forth from the high halls. "Thou, Volusus," he cries, "bid the Volscian squadrons arm, and lead out the Rutulians! Thou, Messapus, and thou, Coras, with thy brother, spread the horsemen under arms over the broad plains. Let some guard the city gates and man the towers; let the rest charge with me, where I shall command."
[463] At once from all the city there is a rush to the walls. Lord Latinus himself, dismayed by the disas- trous hour, quits the council and postpones his high designs, oft chiding himself that he gave not ready welcome to Dardan Aeneas, nor, for his city's sake, adopted him as son. Others dig trenches before the gates or shoulder stones and stakes. The hoarse clarion gives bloody signal for battle. Then lo! a motley ring of matrons and boys girdle the walls; the final struggle summons all. Moreover the queen, with a great throng of mothers, rides  up to the temple of Pallas and her towered heights, bearing gifts, and at her side the maid Lavinia, source of all that woe, her beauteous eyes downcast. Ascending, the matrons fill the temple with smoke of incense and from the high threshold pour sad lamentations: " O mighty in arms, mistress in war, Tritonian maid, break with thine hand the spear of the Phrygian pirate, hurl him prone to earth and stretch him prostrate beneath our lofty gates." As for Turnus, he, with emulous fury, girds himself for the fray. And now he has donned his flashing breastplate and bristles with brazen scales; his legs he had sheathed in gold, his temples are yet bare, and his sword he had buckled to his side. Glittering in gold, he runs down from the fortress height; he exults in courage, and in hope even now seizes the foe — even as, when a horse, bursting his tether, has fled the stalls, free at last, and lord of the open plain, either, mark you! he makes for the pastures and herds of mares, or, wont to bathe in the well-known river, lie darts forth, and neighs, with head out-stretched high in wanton joy, while his mane plays over neck and over shoulder.
[498] To meet him sped Camilla, attended by the Volscian array, and hard by the gates the queen leaped from her horse; at whose example all her troop quitted their steeds and glided to earth. Then thus she speaks: "Turnus, if the brave may justly place aught of trust in themselves, I dare and pro- mise to face Aeneas' cavalry, and singly ride to meet the Tyrrhene horse. Suffer this hand to essay war's first perils; do thou on foot stay by the walls and guard the town." To this Turnus, with eyes fixed upon the dread maid: " O maiden, glory of Italy, what thanks shall I try to utter or repay? But now, since thy spirit soars above all, share thou with me the toil. Aeneas — so rumour tells, and scouts sent forth report the tidings true — has insolently thrown forward his light-armed horse, to sweep the plains; himself, o'erpassing the ridge, marches by the mountain's lonely steeps upon the town. Snares of war I lay in an over-arched pathway 'mid the wood, to block with armed troops the gorge's double jaws. Do thou in battle array await the Tyrrhene horse; with thee shall be the valiant Messapus, the Latin squadrons, and Tiburtus' troop: take thou too a captain's charge," This said, with like words he heartens Messapus and the allied captains to battle, and moves against the foe.
[522] There lies a vale with sweeping curve, fit site for stratagems and wiles of war, hemmed in on either side by a wall black with dense leafage. Hither leads a narrow path, with straitened gorge and jealous approach. Above it, amid the watch-towers of the mountain-top, lies a hidden plain and a safe shelter, whether one would charge from right or left, or take stand upon the ridge and roll down giant stones. Hither the warrior repairs by a familiar line of road, and, seizing his ground, sat him down within the perilous woods.
[532] Meanwhile, in Heaven's halls Latona's daughter addressed fleet Opis, one of her maiden sisterhood and sacred band, and opened her lips to these words of sorrow: " Camilla goes forth to the cruel war, O maiden, and vainly girds on our arms, dear as she is to me beyond others. For no new love is this that has come to Diana nor sudden the spell wherewith it has stirred her heart. When, driven from his realm through hatred of his tyrant might, Metabus was leaving Privernum's ancient city, as he fled amid the press of battle-strife, he took with him his infant child to share his exile, and called her, after her mother Casmilla's name, but slightly changed, Camilla. The father, carrying her before him on his breast, sought the long ridges of lonely woodland: on every side pressed fierce weapons, and with wide-spread soldiery hovered the Volscians. Lo I athwart his flight, Amasenus was foaming in flood above his highest banks, so fierce a rain had burst from the clouds. Fain to swim the stream, he is checked by love for his babe, and he fears for his precious burden. Of a sudden, as he inly pondered every course, he settled on this reluctant resolve: the huge spear, which the warrior haply bore in his stout hand, hard-knotted and of seasoned oak — to this he fastens his child, encased in bark of wild cork-wood, and bound her featly round the centre of the shaft; then poising it in his giant hand, thus cries to the heavens: 'Gracious one, dweller in the woodland, Latonian maid, this child I vow to thy service, I her father; thine are the first weapons she holds, as through the air, thy suppliant, she flees the foe. Accept, O goddess, I implore, for thine own, her whom now I commit to the uncertain breeze.' He said, and, drawing back his arm, launches the spin- ning shaft: loud roared the waters, over the rushing river flees hapless Camilla upon the whizzing steel. But Metabus, now that a great band pressed closer upon him, plunges into the flood, and in triumph plucks from the grassy turf his offering to Trivia, the spear and the maid. Him no cities received to their homes or walls, nor in his wild mood would he himself have yielded thereto: amid shepherds and on the lone mountains he passed his days. Here amid brakes and beasts' rugged lairs he nursed his child on milk at the breast of a wild mare from the herd, squeezing the teats into her tender lips. And soon as her baby feet had planted her earliest steps, he armed her hands with a pointed lance, and hung quiver and bow from her little shoulder. In place of gold to clasp her hair, in place of long trailing robe, there hang from her head adown the back a tiger's spoils. Even then with tender hand she hurled her childish darts, swung round her head the smooth-thonged sling, and struck down Strymonian crane or snowy swan. Many a mother in Tyrrhene towers longed for her as daughter in vain; content with Diana alone, she cherishes unsullied a lifelong love for her weapons and her maidenhood. I would that she had not been swept away in warfare such as this, essaying to brave the Teucrians: so were she still my darling and a sister of my train. But come, seeing tliat untimely doom weighs upon her, glide from heaven, O nymph, and seek the Latin borders, where under evil omen they join in the gloomy fray. Take these, and draw from my quiver an avenging shaft: by it let the foe, whoe'er he be, Trojan or Italian, that with wound shall profane her sacred limbs, pay me forfeit in like manner with his blood. Then in the hollow of a cloud I will bear body and armour of the hapless maid unspoiled to the tomb, and lay them away in her own land." She spoke; but Opis sped down with whirring sound through heaven's light air, her form enshrouded in black whirlwind.
[597] But meanwhile the Trojan band draws near the walls, with the Etruscan chiefs and all their mounted array, marshalled by number into squadrons. The war-steed prances neighing o'er all the plain, and, fighting the tight-drawn rein, swerves hither and thither: far and wide the field bristles with the steel of spears, and the plains are ablaze with uplifted arms. Likewise, over against them, Messapus, and the fleet Latins, and Coras with his brother, and maid Camilla's troop, come into view, confronting them on the plain; with hands back-drawn afar, they thrust the lance and brandish the javelin; the marching of men and neighing of steeds grows fiery-fierce. And now in its advance each host had halted within spear-cast of each; with sudden shout they dash forth, and spur on their furious steeds; at once from all sides they shower darts as thick as snow- flakes, and the sky is veiled in shade. Forthwith Tyrrhenus and fierce Aconteus charge with spears amain, and are first to go down with mighty crash, breaking and shattering their chargers, breast against breast. Aconteus, flung off" like thunderbolt or mass driven forth from an engine, is hurled headlong afar, and scatters his life into the air.
[618] Straightway the lines waver, and the Latins, routed, cast their shields behind them, and turn their horses cityward. The Trojans give chase; Asilas in the van leads the squadrons. And now they were drawing nigh the gates, when again the Latins raise their shout, and wheel about their chargers' supple necks; the others flee, and retreat afar with loosened rein: as when ocean, advancing with alternate flood, now rushes shoreward, dashes o'er the cliffs in a wave of foam, and drenches the utmost sands with its swelling curve; now flees in fast retreat and in its surge sucks back revolving stones, leaving the strand with gliding shoal. Twice the Tuscans drove the routed Rutulians to the city; twice, repulsed, they glance backwards, as they sling behind them their protecting shields. But when, clashing In the third encounter, the whole lines stood interlocked, and man marked man, then in truth rose groans of the dying, and deep in blood welter arms and bodies and horses, wounded unto death, and mingled with slaughtered riders: fierce swells the fight. Orsilochus hurled a lance at Remulus' steed — for its lord he shrank to meet — and left the steel beneath its ear. At this blow the charger rears furious, and, brooking not the wound, with chest uplifted flings his legs on high; hurled forth, Remulus rolls on earth. Catillus strikes down lollas, and Herminius, giant in courage, giant in body and arms; on his bare head stream his yellow locks, and bare are his shoulders; for him wounds have no terrors; so vast a frame ftices the steel. Through his broad shoulders the driven spear comes quivering, and, piercing through, bends him double with anguish. Everywhere the dark blood streams; they deal carnage, clashing with the sword, and seek amid wounds a glorious death.
[648] But in the heart of the slaughter, like an Amazon, one breast bared for the fray, and quiver-girt, rages Camilla; and now tough javelins she showers thick from her hand, now a stout battle-axe she snatches with unwearied grasp; the golden bow, armour of Diana, clangs from her shoulders. And even if, back pressed, she withdraws, she turns her bow and aims darts in her flight. But round her are her chosen comrades, maiden Larina and Tulla, and Tarpeia, shaking an axe of bronze, daughters of Italy, whom godlike Camilla herself chose to be her pride, good handmaids both in peace and war. Such are the Amazons of Thrace, when they tramp over Thermodon's streams and war in blazoned armour, whether I'ound Hippolyte, or when Penthesilea, child of Mars, returns in her chariot, and, amid loud tumultuous cries, the woman-host exult with crescent shields.
[664] Whom first, whom last, fierce maid, does thy dart strike down? How many a frame dost thou stretch dying on earth? First Euneus, son of Clytius, whose unguarded breast, as he faces her, she pierces through with her long pine-shaft. Spouting streams of blood, he falls, bites the gory dust, and, dying, writhes upon his wound. Then Liris she fells, and Pagasus above him: while one, thrown from his stabbed horse, gathers up the reins, and the other, coming up, stretches an unharmed hand to stay his fall, headlong they fall together. To these she adds Amastrus, son of Hippotas; and, bending to the task, she follows from far with her spear Tereus, and Harpalycus, and Demophoon, and, Chromis; and as many darts as she sent spinning from her hand, so many Phrygians fell. At a distance rides the hunter Ornytus in strange armour on an Iapygian steed: a hide stripped from a fighting steer swathes his broad shoulders, his head is shielded by a wolf's huge gaping mouth and white-fanged jaws, and his hand is armed with rustic pike; himself he moves in the midmost ranks, a full head above all. Him she caught— for easy it was amid the rout — and pierced, then above him thus cries with pitiless heart: "Tuscan, didst thou think thou wert chasing beasts in the forests? The day is come that with woman's weapons shall refute the vaunts of thee and thine. Yet no slight renown is this thou shalt carry to thy father's shades — to have fallen by the spear of Camilla!"
[690] Next she slays Orsilochus and Butes, two Teucrians of mightiest frame. Butes she pierced with spear-point in the back, 'twixt corslet and helm, where the rider's neck gleams, and the shield hangs from the left arm; Orsilochus she flees, and, chased in a wide circle, foils him, wheels into an inner ring and pursues the pursuer; then rising higher, she drives her strong axe again and again through armour and through bone, albeit he implores and prays oft for mercy; the wound spatters the face with warm brain. Now fell in her way, and paused in terror at the sudden vision, the warrior son of Aunus, dweller upon the Apennine, not the meanest in Liguria, while Fate allowed him to deceive. He, when he sees that by no fleetness can he escape combat or turn the queen from her onset, essaying to ply guile with policy and craft, thus begins: " What great glory is it, if thou, though a woman, trustest in thy strong steed? Away with flight; dare to meet me hand to hand on equal ground, and gird thee to fight afoot; soon shalt thou know to whom vainglory brings bane." He spake, but she, furious and burning with the bitter smart, passes her horse to a comrade and confronts him in equal arms, afoot and unafraid, with naked sword and shield unblazoned. But the youth, deeming he had won by guile, himself darts away, pausing not, and turning his bridle rushes off in flight, goading his charger to speed with iron spur. "Foolish Ligurian, vainly puffed up in pride of heart, for naught hast thou tried thy slippery native tricks, nor shall thy lies take thee home unscathed to lying Annus! " So cries the maiden, and, with fleet foot, swift as lightning, crosses the horse's path, and, seizing the reins, meets him face to face and takes vengeance from his hated blood: lightly as a falcon, bird of prophecy, darting from a lofty rock, o'ertakes on her wings a dove in a cloud aloft, then holds her in his clutch and with crooked claws tears out her heart, while blood and rent plumage flutter from the sky.
[725] But not with unseeing eyes the Sire of gods and men sits throned on high Olympus, viewing the scene. He rouses Tyrrhenian Tarchon to the fierce fray, and pricks him to wrath by no gentle spur. So, amid the slaughter and wavering columns, Tarchon rides, and goads his squadrons with diverse cries, calling each man by name, and rallying the routed to the fight. " What fear, ye Tuscans, never to be stung by shame, sluggards always, what utter cowardice has fallen on your hearts? Does a woman drive you in disorder and rout these ranks? To what end bear we the sword? or why these idle weapons in our hands? But not laggard are ye for love and nightly frays, or when the curved flute proclaims the Bacchic dance. Look to the feasts and the cups on the loaded board (this your passion, this your delight!) till the favouring seer announce the sacrifice, and the fat victim call you to the deep groves! " So saying, he spurs his horse into the midst, ready himself also to die, and charges like whirlwind full upon Venulus; then tearing the foe from his steed, grips him with his right hand, clasps him to his breast, and spurring with might and main, carries him off. A shout uprises to heaven, as all the Latins turned their eyes upon the sight. Like lightning flies Tarchon along the plain, the arms and the man before him; then from the head of his foe's spear breaks off the steel, and searches for an unguarded place, where he may deal a deadly wound; the other, struggling against him, keeps the hand from off" his throat and baffles force with force. And, as when a tawny eagle, soaring on high, carries a serpent she has caught, her feet entwined and her claws clinging tight, but the wounded snake writhes its sinuous coils, and rears its bristling scales, and hisses with its mouth, towering aloft; she no less with crooked beak assails her struggling victim, while her wings flap the air: even so from the Tiburtian line Tarchon carries off his prey in triumph. Following their chiefs example and success, Maeonia's sons make onslaught. Then Arruns, due to his fate, circles round fleet Camilla with javelin and deep cunning — in this surpassing her — and tries what chance may be easiest. Wherever the infuriate maid dashed amid the ranks, there Arruns creeps up and silently tracks her footsteps; where she returns victorious and retires from the foe, there the youth stealthily turns his swift reins. This approach he essays, and now that, and traverses the whole circuit round about, the unerring spear quivering in his relentless hand.
[768] It chanced that Chloreus, sacred to Cybelus, and once a priest, glittered resplendent afar in Phrygian armour, and spurred his foaming charger, whose covering was a skin, plumed with brazen scales and clasped with gold. Himself ablaze in the deep hue of foreign purple, he launched Gortynian shafts from Lycian bow: golden was that bow upon his shoulders, and golden was the seer's helmet; his saffron scarf and its rustling linen folds were gathered into a knot by yellow gold; embroidered with the needle were his tunic and barbaric hose. Him, whether in hope to fasten on temple-gate Trojan arms, or to flaunt herself in golden spoil, the maiden, singling out from all the battle fray, blindly pursued in huntress fashion, and recklessly raged through all the ranks with a woman's passion for booty and for spoil: when at length, seizing the chance, Arrujis from ambush summons his lance, and thus prays aloud to Heaven:
[785] "Apollo, most high of gods, guardian of holy Soracte, whose chief worshippers are we, for whom is fed the blaze of the pine-wood heap, while we thy votaries passing in strength of faith amid the fire, plant our steps on the deep embers  — grant that this shame be effaced by our arms, O Father Almighty! I seek no plunder, no trophy of the maid's defeat, nor any spoils; other feats shall bring me fame; so but this dread scourge fall stricken beneath my blow, inglorious I will return to the cities of my sires."
[794] Phoebus heard, and in his heart vouchsafed that half his prayer should prosper; half he scattered to the flying breezes. To o'erthrow and strike down Camilla in sudden death, he yielded to his prayer; that his noble country should see his return he granted not, and the blasts bore his accents to the southern gales. Therefore, when the spear, sped from his hand, whizzed through the air, all the Volscians turned their eager eyes and minds upon the queen. She herself, neither of air, nor of sound, nor of weapon coming from the sky recked aught, till the spear, borne home, beneath the bare breast found lodging, and, driven deep, drank her maiden blood. In alarm, her comrades hurry around her, and catch their falling queen. Startled above all, Arruns flees in mingled joy and fear, and no more dares he to trust his lance, or to meet the maiden's weapons. And lo! even as the wolf, when he has slain a shepherd or a great steer, ere hostile darts can pursue him, straightway plunges by pathless ways among the high mountains, conscious of a reckless deed, and slackening his tail claps it quivering beneath his belly, and seeks the woods: even so does Arruns, in confusion, steal away from sight, and, bent on flight, plunges amidst the armed throng. She, with dying hand, tugs at the dart; but between the bones the iron point stands fast beside the ribs within the deep wound. Bloodless she sinks; her eyes sink, chill with death; the once radiant hue has left her face. Then, as her breath fails, she thus accosts Acca, a maiden of equal years and true to Camilla beyond all else, sole sharer of her cares, and thus she speaks: "Thus far, sister Acca, has my strength availed; now the bitter wound o'erpowers me, and all around grows dim and dark. Haste away, and bear to Turnus this my latest charge, to take my place in the battle, and ward the Trojans from the town. And now farewell! " With these words she dropped the reins, gliding helplessly to earth. Then, growing chill, she slowly freed herself from all the body's bonds, drooped her nerveless neck and the head which Death had seized, letting fall her weapons: and with a moan life passed indignant to the Shades below. Then indeed a boundless uproar rose, striking the golden stars: Camilla fallen, the fight waxes fiercer; on they rush in crowds together, all the Teucrian host, the Tyrrhene chiefs, and Evander's Arcadian squadrons.
[836] But Opis, Trivia's sentinel, has long been seated high on the mountain top, and, undismayed, watches the combat. And when far off, amid the din of raging warriors, she espied Camilla done piteously to death, she sighed and from her heart's depth uttered these words: "Alas! too cruel, too cruel, O maiden, the forfeit thou hast paid for essaying to brave the Teucrians in battle! Naught has it availed thee, all lonely mid the wilds, to have served Diana, or to have carried our shafts upon thy shoulder. Yet thy queen has not left thee unhonoured even in death's last hour; nor shall this thy doom be without renown among the nations, nor shalt thou bear the reproach of one unavenged; for whoso hath with wound profaned thy limbs shall pay the debt of death." Under the mountain height stood a mound of earth, the mighty tomb of Dercennus, Laurentine king of old, screened by shadowy ilex; here first the beauteous goddess, with swift spring, plants her feet, and from the barrow's height espies Arruns. When she saw him exulting in spirit and swelling with pride: " Why," she cries, "strayest so far? Hither turn thy steps, hither come to thy death and for Camilla receive due guerdon! Shalt thou, even thou, die by Diana's darts?" So spake the Thracian nymph, and from gilded quiver plucked a winged shaft, stretched the bow with fell intent, and drew it far, till the curving ends should meet together and, with levelled hands, she should touch the steel's point with her left, her breast with her right and with the bow-string. Straightway, at the selfsame moment, Arruns heard the whistling dart and whirring air, and the steel was lodged in his breast. Him, gasping and moaning his last, his forgetful comrades leave on the unknown dust of the plain; Opis wings her way to heavenly Olympus.
[868] First flees, their mistress lost, Camilla's light squadron; in rout flee the Rutulians, flees valiant Atinas; scattered captains, and troops left leaderless make for shelter, and, wheeling their horses, gallop to the walls. Nor can any with arms check the onset of death-dealing Trojans, nor stand against it, but their unstrung bows they cast on fainting shoulders, and in their galloping course the horse-hoof shakes the crumbling plain. On rolls to the walls a cloud of dust, black and murky, and from the watch-towers mothers, beating their breasts, uplift to the stars of heaven their womanish cries. Upon such as first broke at full speed through the open gates, there presses hard a throng of foes, mingling with their ranks, nor escape they a piteous death, but on the very threshold, their native walls about them, and within the shelter of their homes, they are thrust through, and gasp away their lives. Some close the gates, and dare not open a way to their friends, nor receive them in the town, implore as they may; and slaughter most pitiful ensues, these guarding the entry sword in hand, and those rushing upon the sword. Shut out before the eyes and gaze of weeping parents, some, driven by the rout, roll headlong into the trenches; some, charging blindly with loosened rein, batter at the gates and stoutly-barred doors. The very mothers from the walls, in keenest rivalry (true love of country points the way), when they marked Camilla, flung weapons with trembling hands, and hastily do the work of the steel with stout oak-poles and seared stakes, and foremost are fain to die upon their walls.
